
The aim of the study is to determine the relationship between body mass index (BMI) and metabolic syndrome and to investigate the epidemiological characteristics of this syndrome in elderly men.

A survey was conducted among 683 elderly men aged 65 years and over. To identify the prevalence of metabolic syndrome and epidemiological condition of some metabolic indexes after grading with BMI, the working definition of Chinese Diabetes Society was accepted. The relationship between BMI and certain diseases was analyzed.

(1) The prevalence of metabolic syndrome increased concomitantly with the increase of BMI, when BMI was beyond 23 kg/m(2). (2) There was positive correlation between BMI and the number of the abnormal metabolic indexes (r = 0.557). (3) There was positive correlation between the increase of BMI and the levels of systolic blood pressure (SBP), diastolic blood pressure (DBP) and triglyceride level (r = 0.189, 0.198 and 0.201 respectively). There was negative correlation between the increase of BMI and the level of high density lipoprotein cholesterol (r = -0.157). (4) There was positive correlation between the increase of BMI and the levels of SBP (r = 0.140) and DBP (r = 0.202) in non-hypertensive population. (5) There was positive correlation between the increase of BMI and the levels of fasting blood glucose (r = 0.103) and postprandial blood glucose (r = 0.113) in non-diabetic population. (6) There was significant increase of BMI in the population with coronary heart disease and impairment of kidney function (P &<0.05). (7) The prevalence of metabolic syndrome was significantly elevated in the population with coronary heart disease, impairment of kidney function and cerebrovascular disease (P &<0.05).

When BMI is increased, the number of abnormal metabolic indexes is increased and the prevalence of metabolic syndrome is elevated as well. In the population with the above mentioned diseases, the prevalence of metabolic syndrome is high and the BMI of these patients is significantly increased.

