
The association between type A behavior pattern (TABP) and physical activity is unclear, with studies reporting both positive and negative results and some reporting no association. Because previous studies have looked primarily at the relationship between TABP and exercise, the purpose of this study was to assess the association between TABP and (1) total activity, (2) activity at work, (3) exercise, (4) household chores, (5) leisure activity, and (6) inactivity.

Two hundred twenty-seven women (111 African American, 116 Hispanic) from a larger study (Women on the Move) were used in the analysis for this study. The mean age was 49.3 years (SD 7 years), mean weight 77 kg (SD 17.6 kg), and mean body mass index (BMI) 30 (SD 6.5). As part of the Women on the Move Study, participants completed a 7-day diary and a 10-item Activity Temperament Scale. Multiple regression analysis was conducted to test the relationship between TABP and daily activity. Significant findings were observed for total activity and leisure activity with the Activity Temperament Scale summary score. Both had positive associations, indicating that those who had a higher score on the Activity Temperament Scale also had higher total activity kilocalories (kcal) and leisure activity kilocalories. Significant positive findings were also observed for total activity, leisure activity, and exercise with individual items on the Activity Temperament Scale. Household chores, work, and inactivity had significant negative associations with one or more of the individual items on the Activity Temperament Scale.

Although previous studies have reported on TABP and physical activity (primarily exercise), these findings provide new information specific to daily living activity by dimension in an older minority population. Results suggest a positive association between TABP and daily living activity with a general pattern of higher scores associated with higher activity and lower scores associated with higher inactivity. However, even though some significant findings were observed, the overall models did not reveal meaningful associations.

