
The purpose of this study was to compare the impact of drug therapy on weight loss, Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) scores, and binge eating patterns (BES) between obese binge eaters and non-binge eaters.

22 severe binge eaters, 17 moderate binge eaters, and 16 non-binge eaters received phentermine resin 15mg/day and dl-fenfluramine 20mg three times daily over a 6 month period for weight loss. All data are reported as mean+/-S.

The percent weight loss compared to baseline within the 3 groups ranged from 8.9% to 11.3% at 3 months and 10.6% to 14.9% at 6 months. After 6 months, 73% of the severe binge eaters, 59% of moderate binge eaters and 69% of non-binge eaters had experienced more than 10% weight loss. BDI scores were significantly higher in the severe group at baseline when compared to non-binge eaters (p&<.006). After 3 and 6 months BDI scores improved in all groups but remained significantly different between the severe and non-binge eaters until the 6-month assessment. BES scores declined in all groups over the 6-month period. Echocardiograms were performed in 35 of 55 subjects following reports of a possible association between fenfluramine and valvular changes. Fifteen (43%) of subjects had no abnormal findings and 20 (57%) had evidence of valvular insufficiency occurring in one or more valves. Seven patients (20%) had significant valve damage according to the DHHS and FDA criteria.

After 24 weeks of treatment severe binge eaters improved their eating pattern, depression scores, and achieved weight loss similar to non-binge eaters. These data suggest that pharmacologic intervention for weight loss and subsequent weight maintenance can be as successful in binge eaters as non-binge eaters. A relationship was seen between duration of drug treatment and valvular insufficiency in subjects treated for an average of 52 weeks. These findings validate the FDA requirement for studies of at least 1 year duration to evaluate both the safety and efficacy of pharmacologic treatment for obesity.

