
To estimate non-esterified fatty acids kinetics in patients with Type II (non-insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus and obese subjects in the postabsorptive state and during hyperinsulinaemia using non-equilibrium tracer conditions.

We evaluated the effect of hyperinsulinaemia [euglycaemic clamp with insulin infused at 30 mU x kg(-1) x h(-1) (3-4 h) and 150 mU x kg(-1) x h(-1) (3 h)] on non-esterified fatty acid kinetics, traced with [14C]-palmitate using non-equilibrium tracer conditions in non-obese and obese healthy subjects and Type II diabetic patients (10 per group). Michaelis-Menten kinetics were applied for total non-esterified fatty acid disposal, which was assumed to be composed of total arterial plasma non-esterified fatty acid rate of appearance (equalling the rate of disappearance) and tissue uptake of non-esterified fatty acids derived from intravascular triglyceride hydrolysis. A model was developed to calculate the rate of escape of non-esterified fatty acids from tissue uptake and the net rate of tissue lipolysis.

Total arterial plasma non-esterified fatty acid rate of appearance was lower in non-obese healthy subjects than in the other groups at low insulin infusion (p &<0.05) and in obese Type II diabetic patients at high insulin infusion (p &<0.05). Plasma triglycerides were also lowest in non-obese healthy subjects during hyperinsulinaemia (p &<.05 from other groups). The rate of escape from tissue uptake decreased during hyperinsulinaemia (p &<0.05 for each group) but remained higher in obese Type II diabetic patients (p &<0.05 from non-obese healthy subjects). In contrast, net rate of tissue lipolysis was not different between the groups at baseline and its decline during hyperinsulinaemia (p &<0.05 for each group) was similar in all groups.

This study challenges the view that the antilipolytic effect of insulin is impaired in Type II diabetes and obesity. We suggest that a high plasma triglyceride concentration causes a higher escape of non-esterified fatty acids from tissue uptake, leading to an impaired suppression of total arterial plasma rate of appearance during a low degree of hyperinsulinaemia in obese subjects and Type II diabetic patients and during a high degree of hyperinsulinaemia in obese Type II diabetic patients.

