
The chronic moderate exercise positively alters the systemic glucose homeostasis, enhances the insulin action, and ameliorates the oxidative damage in the skeletal muscle and liver. The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of an intermittent aerobic training on the metabolic parameters of the white adipose tissue in the obese Zucker rats.

Obese Zucker rats, 8 week old, were subjected to running on a 4-channel treadmill (1 h/day 5 times/week 20 m/min at maximum) for 10 weeks, except the weekends, (Trained Obese Zucker, TOZ) or were placed to the turned-off treadmill (Sedentary Obese Zucker, SOZ) for the same period. The serum insulin, glucose, and triglyceride were determined. The gene expression of the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) components and selected metabolic parameters were quantified by real-time qPCR in the liver and epididymal and retroperitoneal adipose tissues. The content of the protein carbonyl groups was assayed in the liver and epididymal fat depot.

The gene expression of the adipocyte fatty acid binding protein 4 (FABP4) was significantly elevated in the epididymal and retroperitoneal adipose tissues of the TOZ rats. The level of the adiponectin mRNA was increased in the retroperitoneal adipose tissue while leptin and inhibitory G-protein α mRNA were elevated in the epididymal adipose tissue after exercise. The aerobic training led to a decrease in the amount of protein carbonyl groups in the epididymal adipose depot. Transcription of the angiotensinogen, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), and AT1 receptor genes in the epididymal adipose tissue was not influenced by the exercise. In the liver, only the AT1 receptor gene expression increased significantly. The serum glucose, insulin, and triglycerides concentrations were not changed in the TOZ rats when compared to SOZ animals.

Data of the present study indicate that an intermittent moderate exercise in the hyperphagic obese Zucker rats lasting for 10 weeks improves some of the morphometric and metabolic parameters of the white adipose tissue and decreases the protein oxidation implying a general beneficial effect of the long-lasting exercising.

