
To estimate prevalence rates of diabetes and impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) in three American Indian populations, using standardized diagnostic criteria, and to assess the association of diabetes with the following selected possible risk factors: age, obesity, family history of diabetes, and amount of Indian ancestry.

This cross-sectional study involved enrolled members, men and women aged 45-74 years, of 13 American Indian tribes or communities in Arizona, Oklahoma, and South and North Dakota. Eligible participants were invited to the clinic for a personal interview and a physical examination. Diabetes and IGT status were defined by the World Health Organization criteria and were based on fasting plasma glucose and oral glucose tolerance test results. Data on age, family history of diabetes, and amount of Indian ancestry were obtained from the personal interview, and measures of obesity included body mass index, percentage body fat, and waist-to-hip ratio.

A total of 4,549 eligible participants were examined, and diabetes status was determined for 4,304 (1,446 in Arizona, 1,449 in Oklahoma, and 1,409 in the Dakotas). In all three centers, diabetes was more prevalent in women than in men. Arizona had the highest age-adjusted rates of diabetes: 65% in men and 72% in women. Diabetes rates in Oklahoma (38% in men and 42% in women) and South and North Dakota (33% in men and 40% in women), although considerably lower than in Arizona, were several times higher than those reported for the U.S. population. Rates of IGT among the three populations (14-17%) were similar to those in the U.S. population. Diabetes rates were positively associated with age, level of obesity, amount of Indian ancestry, and parental diabetes status.

Diabetes is found in epidemic proportions in Native American populations. Prevention programs and periodic screening should be implemented among American Indians. Standards of care and intervention have been developed by the Indian Health Service for individuals in whom diabetes is diagnosed. These programs should be expanded to include those with IGT to improve glycemic control or to reduce the risk of development of diabetes as well as to reduce the risk of diabetic complications.

