
To search whether there are differences in serum levels of adiponectin in subjects with metabolic syndrome (MS) as compared to the healthy controls.

Serum levels of adiponectin were measured by ELISA in 22 subjects with MS (MS group: 9 males and 13 females, average age +/- SD 43.19 +/- 6.16) and in 17 healthy controls of about the same age (CONT group: 8 males and 9 females, average age +/- SD 45.88 +/- 11.6). All subjects of MS group had BMI&>30 and also other criteria of MS (e.g. obesity, insulin resistance, possible disorders of glucose metabolism, dyslipidemia and hypertension) were manifested in all of them. Adiponectin levels in serum were compared between the groups and also within the pooled MS plus CONT group the interrelations between serum levels of adiponectin and BMI, serum fasting insulin (estimated by RIA method) and smoking were examined. For statistical processing one way ANOVA or its non-parametric parallel (Kruskal-Wallis one-way analysis) as well as regression and correlation analysis were used.

Subjects with MS syndrome had significantly higher BMI, systolic and diastolic BP, fasting glycemia and insulin level. Significantly higher were also the values of both indexes of insulin resistance such as IR(HOMA) and IR(QUlCKI). In contrast, however, MS group had significantly lower adiponectin level than CONT group. There was no difference between the average age of both groups. In pooled MS plus CONT group inverse correlations were found between serum levels of adiponectin on one side and BMI and fasting insulin level on the other, while the level of adiponectin between smokers (which was declared by 18/39 subjects) and non-smokers did not show any influence on serum levels of adiponectin.

Low level of adiponectin in obese individuals may be considered as a marker predicting a possibility of the development of metabolic syndrome. It is suggested that early regulation of serum adiponectin levels in obese subjects by treatment of obesity, especially in young ones, could result in a lowering the risk of mainly cardiovascular diseases associated with MS.

