
This paper analyses the patterns of contraceptive use among Australian women, using data from the 1995 National Health Survey. More than 44% of all women aged 18-49 years reported using a method of contraception. Among users, the 2 most commonly reported methods were the pill (60%) and condom (27%); IUD and natural methods accounted for less than 5% each. Sterilizing operations of the women/partner were the most frequently reported reasons for nonuse of contraception in women aged over 35 years, while among the younger women the most reported reasons were pregnancy or trying to get pregnant and not being sexually active. Among pill-users about a quarter were smokers, 20% overweight and 13% reported heart or circulatory disease. These figures were generally lower than in the general population but indicate a need for regular monitoring. The survey demonstrates the continuing evolution in the use of contraception among Australian women.

This paper presents an analysis of the patterns of contraceptive use among Australian women using the 1995 National Health Survey data.  Among the 4.1 million women aged 18-49, 44% were reported to be contraceptive users.  The two most commonly used contraceptive methods were pills and condoms, which were used by 60% and 27% of the respondents, respectively.  This was followed by the use of IUDs and other methods, which accounted for less than 5% of the subjects.  An increasing rate of sterilizations was noted among women aged 45-49, which was nearly twice the rate of vasectomy among their partners.  On the other hand, reasons for not obtaining a sterilization among younger subjects included a desire for pregnancy and not being sexually active.  Among the women who used oral contraceptives, 25% were smokers, 20% were overweight, and 13% reported heart and circulatory diseases.  In a comparison of the 1983 and 1995 health surveys, an increase in oral contraceptive use from 23.2% to 26.7% was noted among women aged 18-49 years.  The survey demonstrated the continuing evolution of contraceptive use among Australian women.

