
In animals, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-alpha (PPARalpha) and PPARgamma agonists down-regulate 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 (11beta-HSD1) mRNA and activity in liver and adipose tissue, respectively, and PPARgamma agonists reduce ACTH secretion from corticotrope cells.

Our objective was to test whether PPAR agonists alter cortisol secretion and peripheral regeneration by 11beta-HSD1 in humans and whether reduced cortisol action contributes to metabolic effects of PPARgamma agonists.

Three randomized placebo-controlled crossover studies were conducted at a clinical research facility.

Healthy men and patients with type 2 diabetes participated. INTERVENTIONS, OUTCOME MEASURES, AND RESULTS: In nine healthy men, 7 d of PPARalpha agonist (fenofibrate) or PPARgamma agonist (rosiglitazone) had no effect on cortisol secretion, hepatic cortisol generation after oral cortisone administration, or tracer kinetics during 9,11,12,12-[(2)H](4)-cortisol infusion, although rosiglitazone marginally reduced cortisol generation in sc adipose tissue measured by in vivo microdialysis. In 12 healthy men, 4-5 wk of rosiglitazone increased insulin sensitivity during insulin infusion but did not change 11beta-HSD1 mRNA or activity in sc adipose tissue, and insulin sensitization was unaffected by glucocorticoid blockade with a combination of metyrapone and RU38486. In 12 men with type 2 diabetes 12 wk of rosiglitazone reduced arteriovenous cortisone extraction across abdominal sc adipose tissue and reduced 11beta-HSD1 mRNA in sc adipose tissue but increased plasma cortisol concentrations.

Neither PPARalpha nor PPARgamma agonists down-regulate 11beta-HSD1 or cortisol secretion acutely in humans. The early insulin-sensitizing effect of rosiglitazone is not dependent on reducing intracellular glucocorticoid concentrations. Reduced adipose 11beta-HSD1 expression and increased plasma cortisol during longer therapy with rosiglitazone probably reflect indirect effects, e.g. mediated by changes in body fat.

