
Psoriasis is a chronic inflammatory dermatosis leading to the development of systemic inflammatory reaction. Previous data indicated the coexistence of psoriasis and the occurrence of metabolic disorders, with the common background of both processes determined by a chronic inflammation. The coexisting disorders, including type 2 diabetes, hypertension, heart ischemic disease, dislipidemia and obesity may have an important impact on intensity of psoriasis activity.

The analysis comprised of 82 randomly matched patients with various clinical forms of psoriasis, aged 17 to 81 years. In patients PASI and BSA indexes, BMI value and laboratory parameters of metabolic status (glucose and ureic acid levels, lipid fractions and CRP level in the serum) were evaluated.

An average age in examined group was 54,3 years, an average time of presence of psoriasis symptoms was approximately 20 years. An average PASI value was 21,4; an average BSA value was 39.7%. The coexistence of type 2 diabetes was found in 14.6% of patients, hypertension in 42.7% and heart ischemic disease in 17%. Particularly large group of examined patients comprised persons with overweight (34.1%) and obesity (30.5%). Positive correlation between BSA and body weight, BSA and BMI value, BSA and abdominal circumference as well as positive correlation between PASI and body weight, PASI and BMI value, PASI and abdominal circumference were observed. Abnormal serum glucose levels were observed in 19.5% persons, ureic acid level in 2.9%, total cholesterol in 37.8% LDL cholesterol in 48.8%, and HDL cholesterol in 46.3%. CRP level was elevated in 43.9% patients. Positive correlation between BSA and ureic acid level, as well as PASI and ureic acid level was estimated. No correlation between PASI and the other laboratory parameters was found.

The occurrence of metabolic syndrome is more common in patients with psoriasis in comparison to the general population. The extent and severity of psoriatic lesions correlate with high body weight, BMI and the level of ureic acid.

