
Type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM2) is characterized by carrying a high cardiovascular risk. This situation underscores the importance of intensively treating the risk factors present in diabetic patients, notably dyslipemia. The treatment with cholesterol-lowering drugs may be especially effective to reduce the cardiovascular risk in diabetic patients. Therefore, LDL-cholesterol is a priority target in the lipid management of these patients. This study analyzes the alterations in the lipid profile of diabetic patients receiving treatment with statins, which therefore may contribute to persistent cardiovascular risk in such individuals.

The DYSIS (Dyslipidemia International Study) is an international, observational trial analyzing the lipid profile of patients treated with statins and followed-up on in outpatient clinics by primary care physicians and specialists. This study is referred to the data on the diabetic patients.

Of the total patients enrolled in the DYSIS, the present study included 3703 patients, 39% being diabetics. A total of 59.2% of diabetics showed LDL-C out of goal; triglyceride elevation was observed in 43.6% and 36.4% showed low HDL-C. In diabetics patients with coronary heart disease, 31% had uncontrolled levels of all three lipid parameters. The prevalence of out of goal LDL-C in diabetic patients with metabolic syndrome was close to 60%; 39.8% had low levels of HDL-C and 46,6% high levels of triglycerides. In addition, 57% of diabetic patients with obesity showed LDL-C out of control, despite statins treatment.

Cardiovascular diseases remain the main cause of morbidity-mortality in patients with DM2. The results of the present study show that in diabetic patients the degree of control is very limited with regard to LDL-cholesterol. More than half of diabetic patients treated with statins had LDL-cholesterol out of goal. The level of dyslipidemia control was low, despite statins treatment. Therefore, the detection of atherogenic dyslipidemia may point to the advisability of using combination therapy for dyslipidemia in diabetic patients.

