
People of South Asian origin (e.g. Indians) usually have a more centralized distribution of body fat with thick trunk skinfolds and markedly higher mean waist circumference (WC) for a given level of body fat percentage compared to Europeans and are exceedingly susceptible to coronary heart disease (CHD) worldwide. Owing to ethnic heterogeneity, population specific information on the interrelationship of fat topography with metabolic and blood pressure measures in different Indian populations is immediately required. In view of the above consideration the present work was undertaken to study the interrelationship of the WC and the sum of four (biceps, triceps, subscapular, suprailiac) skinfolds (SF4) with metabolic and blood pressure variables among the well-off Bengalee men aged 30 years and above from Calcutta and suburbs. The sample of the present study comprises 212 male railway employees of the Eastern Railway, Government of India. All 212 subjects were residents of Calcutta and its suburbs. Anthropometrics, lipids (total cholesterol, fasting triglyceride, high, low and very low density lipoprotein cholesterol), fasting plasma glucose and blood pressure measures were taken from each participant. Two-sample (unpaired) t-test revealed that centrally obese men (waist circumference=90 cm) had significantly greater means compared to centrally non-obese subjects for metabolic risk factors and blood pressure. Inter-tertile comparison of lipids, lipoproteins and glucose revealed that there existed no significant differences in their distribution according to SF4 tertiles. The results of multiple regression analyses (after controlling for the linear, cubic and quadratic effect of age) using waist circumferences and SF4 as independent variables demonstrated the significant effect of central obesity on metabolic and blood pressure variables in the study population. This finding indicated the clinical and physiological importance of central body fat accumulation particularly in and around the waist line in explaining risk factors for chronic diseases, e.g. CHD.

