
The research reviewed within this article provides support for both the cognitive and behavioral components of cognitive behavioral weight-loss interventions. Lifestyle based treatments have produced markedly improved results in the past 20 years, in part attributable to changes in treatment structure. Use of pretreatment participant preparation strategies, extended treatment periods with clearly defined weight-loss goals, combining multiple dietary and physical activity strategies, and increasing emphasis on long-term provider contact and relapse prevention have modestly improved long-term weight maintenance. Several investigators have emphasized the need to incorporate additional cognitive components into the cognitive-behavioral treatment of obesity to improve both short- and long-term outcomes. Furthermore, continued insights into metabolic changes producing an energy gap after weight loss should no doubt continue to refine insights into the behavioral requirements of long-term weight loss. Despite increased awareness and behavioral treatment advances, the worldwide prevalence of obesity and weight-related chronic illnesses continues to expound. Behavioral treatment is inherently challenging and time-consuming, and readily available to only a fraction of the population who may benefit from inclusion. Several investigators have cautioned that individual or small group-based interventions are insufficient to serve the population masses requiring treatment, and that continued development of community or Web-based programs, and community-development tactics to increase healthy lifestyles, are needed. The call has been sounded to conceptualize obesity as a chronic health condition requiring lifelong treatment. As such, the conceptualization of cognitive-behavioral therapies as a one-time treatment is passe´ . As the current number of obesity specialists and behaviorally trained professionals is insufficient to combat this problem; an increased emphasis upon training nontraditional weight specialists and nonbehavioral community providers is obviated.

