
The prevalence of overweight and obesity is increasing worldwide at an alarming rate and is due to changes in nutritional patterns and physical activity that adversely affect the health status. Obesity is a complex disorder with multiple interactive causes. It is associated with many chronic, debilitating diseases with important health care cost and it is basically the consequence of sedantery life style and excessive energy intake. Our objective was to measure the prevalence of obesity in adult population of Vojvodina and to describe its characteristics.

This cross-sectional study was conducted in representative sample of 2467 adults from Vojvodina (in adult population of Vojvodina aged 20 years and over). The sample size was determined based on estimated frequency, exposition to risk factors, relative risks and level of statistical significance. All those who completed household interviews attended physical examination.

The prevalence of overweight and obesity (BM&> or =25 kg/m2) in both sexes was 58.5%. Among them, 35.5% were overweight while 23% were obese (BMIl30kg/m2). The frequency of obesity was higher among females (26%) than among males (19.6%) (p&<.01). It showed a steady increase to the age of 65, after which the number of obese decreased. The obesity rate was higher in rural (26. 7%) than urban areas (19%) (p&<.01), and among people with lower level of education and socioeconomic status.

Considering the existing situation concerning the high prevalence of obesity, urgent public action is necessary. It is essential to develop preventive strategies which would affect the whole society. Healthy lifestyle, balanced diet and increased physical activity must be promoted. However, it is not the responsibility of individuals. Health services, the community, food industry, mass media etc, have a crucial role in modifying body weight. Strategies for prevention and management of obesity should be in accordance with the existing public health policy and programs for prevention of noncommunicable diseases.

