
To identify the most commonly used methods for weight reduction in women with polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) utilized by obstetricians and gynaecologists in the United Kingdom (UK).

Permission was sought from the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG) to conduct an electronic survey of all consultants practising in the UK. The questionnaire was anonymous and an electronic link was sent via email to the 1140 consultants whose details were provided by the RCOG. A 27-item questionnaire was developed. The variables evaluated were first-line methods of weight reduction used, proportion of women with PCOS seen that were obese, whether the patients had tried other weight reduction methods before seeking help, the optimal dietary advice and optimal composition, the optimal duration and frequency of exercise suggested, BMI used for suggesting weight loss, percentage of women in whom weight loss worked, length of time allowed prior to suggesting another method, methods considered most effective by patients, use of metformin for weight loss, criteria used for prescribing metformin, first-line anti-obesity drugs preferred if any, second- and third-line methods used, referral to other specialists and criteria for referral for bariatric surgery. Responses were categorical and are reported as proportions.

One hundred and seven (9.4%) consultants responded to the questionnaire. One hundred and four (97%) provided advice on diet and 101 (94%) advice on exercise as their first-line strategy for weight management. Fifty-one (47.7%) stated that they provided specific information on an optimal dietary intake, 53 (49.9%) on the optimal dietary composition and 61 (57%) on the optimal duration and frequency of exercise per week. The commonest second-line methods used were anti-obesity drugs and metformin and the most popular third-line management options were anti-obesity drugs and bariatric surgery.

The results suggest that the information provided to women with PCOS on weight management is variable, and highlight the need for specific guidelines and further research on weight management in women with this condition.

