
To examine the influence of obesity on the patient characteristics and clinicopathologic features of endometrial cancer, and to find how treatment and prognosis were affected by obesity in women with endometrial cancer.

The data of 370 consecutive women operated for endometrial cancer were retrospectively reviewed. Patients were divided into three categories as &<5, 25-29.9 and ≥30 according to BMI. All patients underwent primary surgical treatment including total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral oophorectomy and peritoneal cytology. Pelvic lymphadenectomy was carried out for all patients except for those with no myometrial invasion regardless of the tumor grade or for whom it was technically impossible. Paraaortic lymphadenectomy was performed when pre- and intraoperative assessments suggested non-endometrioid or grade 3 endometrioid cancer,&>50 % myometrial invasion and cervical involvement.

Patients with a BMI (body mass index) of &<5 were significantly younger. Patients with a BMI of ≥30 were statistically less likely to have&>50 % myometrial invasion and more likely to have stage I disease. There were no significant differences in the incidences of positive pelvic and paraaortic lymph nodes and tumor grades between the three groups. Also, there were no differences in surgery type, the mean of removed pelvic and paraaortic lymph node number, hospital stay, blood loss and complications between the groups. The patients with a BMI of ≥30 had significantly longer operating time. There were no statistically significant differences in recurrences, the median number of months at recurrence or the site of recurrence between the three groups, as well as the 5-year overall and disease-free survival of patients. Multivariate proportional hazard models identified stage III and IV disease as significant covariates for mortality rates, while stage III and IV disease, hypertension and pelvic irradiation were identified as significant covariates for recurrence rates.

Positive peritoneal cytology, deep myometrial invasion and stage II-IV endometrial cancer were significantly more common in patients with a BMI of &<5. There were no significant differences in tumor grade, surgical technique, surgical morbidity or adjuvant radiotherapy between the BMI groups. Recurrence and cancer-related mortality rates were not affected by the BMI.

