
Success of selective drug therapies depends on the drug's depot time in the target to treat. Depot time is currently being prolonged, using drug-eluting beads or microspheres for selective internal radiation therapy. The purpose of this study was to establish a model for investigating the depot time of particles injected into tumors in relation to tumor vascularization and particle size.

An animal model with two different vascularized tumors (Walker Carcinoma 256 (hypervascularized) and Yoshida Sarcoma (hypovascularized)) was used. The tumors were implanted into the hind leg of Wistar rats. When the tumors reached 10-15mm, rhenium radiolabeled particles of 25microm and 0.3microm were percutaneously injected into the tumors: large particles (Re-188 microspheres) in 10 hypo- and 10 hypervascularized tumors and small particles (Re-186 sulfid colloid) in 4 hypo- and 16 hypervascularized tumors with the co-injection of the vasoconstrictor, adrenalin (0.01 mg), into 8 hypervascularized tumors. Tumor activity was measured with a gamma camera at 10 min, 1h, 3h, 6h, 14h and 48h p.i. In addition, activity in the lung, liver, spleen, kidneys, and lymph nodes was measured at 48 h p.i. Measurements were adjusted for decay times and then compared.

Drainage of the injected particles is bi-phasic, characterized by a fast wash-out. At 10 min p.i., intratumoral activity decreases to 70% of the initially injected activity. This is followed by a slow decline at 48 h p.i in which intratumoral activity decreases to at least 60% of the initially injected activity. Slow decline is independent of particle size and vascularization, whereas fast leakage depends on both. Co-injecting adrenalin significantly reduced the wash-out of the small particles. Radiolabeled microspheres accumulated mainly in the lungs, smaller colloids in the liver.

Particle stay time, biodistribution, and stability can be easily monitored as shown in this animal model. The hematogeneous wash-out can be reduced, using larger particles and vasoconstrictors. Prolonged retention is independent of vascularization and particle size and appears to be sufficient for therapy.

