
A review of recent results of research into Herpesvirus is presented and a tentative association with cervical cancer is proposed.  2 types of the virus have been identified, HSV-1 which causes fever blisters or lip sores and HSV-2 which causes genital lesions.  The structure and composition of the virus is described.  In addition, mechanisms of productive and nonproductive infection at the cellular level are reviewed.  The pathogenesis of the HSV-1 and HSV-2 infections varies according to previous exposure, whether the patient is in a compromised medical condition and for newborns.  Many primary infections are subclinical, however when apparent are more severe than recurrent cases.  Most infections are localized to superficial areas of the skin or mucous membranes, which may be due to the virus' inability to spread through the connective tissue, variation in tissue susceptibility, proclivity of dissemination through blood or nerves and immune responses.  Primary oral infections range from inapparent to severe gingivostomatitis with extensive ulceration of the mouth, tongue and gum, fever, and adenopathy.  The occular conditions include conjunctivitis, cataracts, iridocyclitis, and panuveitis.  The genital infection occurs on the cervix and external genitalia in women and the penis, urethra, prostate and seminal vesicle in men.  Most cases of neonatal disease are caused by HSV-2.  The neurologic manifestations associated with the virus include encephalitis, meningitis and myelitis.  The recurrent disease consists of localized vesicular lesions caused by various stress factors.  It is suspected that for most recurrences the virus has persisted in the interim in a noninfectious form close to or at the site of the recurrency.  Data from several studies support this hypothesis.  Research into the mechanism of virus persistence and recurrence is focusing on the host cell and the role of immune factors.  Diagnosis is largely clinical although some laboratory aids have been useful.  Among the drugs used in prevention and therapy, the application of vital dye such as neutral red or proflavine, followed by exposure to light has been successful with recurrent lesions.  Research is warranted into the use of fever therapy and interferon.  Recently Hespesvirus has been associated with cancer in at least 6 cases.  Interpretation of data from animal as well as human studies is suggestive of a link but other explanatory factors have not been ruled out.

