
A review is given of human endothelial antigens recognized by monoclonal antibodies and used as vascular markers. These antigens can be classified tentatively into two categories that partly overlap: 1) differentiation markers and 2) antigens involved in specific cellular functions. Monoclonal antibodies recognizing endothelial differentiation markers reacting with all types of human endothelium can be regarded as constitutive endothelial markers. Other differentiation markers have a restricted distribution that is associated with a subtype of endothelium. Although sensitivity of the markers is high in general, specificity for endothelium is not absolute, based on distribution studies in tissues or in cell lines. With the exception of PAL-E and EN-3/EN-4, it is not clear from the literature whether the antibodies also react with lymphatic endothelium. Immunohistochemical examination of other species indicate that only BW 200 is restricted to humans. Immunoelectron microscopy of microvascular cells in tissue specimens has revealed that the monoclonal antibodies recognizing differentiation antigens show different subcellular distribution patterns. PAL-E and BW 200 react with the luminal endothelial surface, in a local and diffuse pattern, respectively. Anti-Von Willebrand factor (i.e., Factor VIII-related ag) antibodies react with Weibel-Palade bodies but also with subendothelial structures. Applications of immunohistochemistry using monoclonal antibodies in diagnostic pathology include assessment of vascular invasion by cancer cells, and identification of endothelial neoplasms and related disorders. Because anti-Factor VIII-related antigen and BW 200 are applicable on formaldehyde-fixed and paraplast-embedded tissue, they are most suitable for histodiagnostic application. Immunohistochemistry using monoclonal antibodies recognizing endothelial antigens involved in specific cellular functions also may contribute to pathobiologic research on the characterization of blood-tissue barriers, e.g., in the tumor vascular bed.

