
The study of the influence of genotype on drug activity and efficacy (pharmacogenetics) and the genome-wide approach to drug discovery and interpretation of complex pharmacological responses (pharmacogenomics) are gaining momentum in current molecular medicine. The reasons of the variable activity and tolerability of cancer chemotherapy are being unraveled by the discovery of genotypic alterations affecting pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of drugs. Indeed, genetic variability may alter drug catabolism (i.e. dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase for 5-fluorouracil, thiopurine-S-methyl transferase for thiopurines, aldehyde dehydrogenase for cyclophosphamide) and anabolism (i.e. thymidine phosphorylase for capecitabine, deoxycitidine kinase for gemcitabine). Moreover, increased expression of transporter systems (i.e. the ATP binding cassette (ABC) superfamily) is associated with reduction of the cytoplasmic levels of drugs which may be unable to exert a cytotoxic effect. Additional systems could protect tumor cells from drug cytotoxicity, including the DNA repair machinery (nucleotide excision repair (NER) and DNA alkyltransferases) and antiapoptotic systems (i.e. bcl-2). Finally, alterations of drug targets may be associated with a decrease in the effectiveness of chemotherapy (i.e. mutations affecting tubulin and topoisomerase I for taxanes and irinotecan, respectively, and increased expression of thymidilate synthase for 5-fluorouracil). Therefore, genetic analysis has the potential to predict treatment efficacy and tolerability. However, major problems encountered in pharmacogenetic and pharmacogenomic studies are the need of extensive validation of available technology, the difficulties in obtaining a suitable amount of tissue from patients during the course of their disease and the extremely complex regulation of gene function. From this perspective, the evaluation of the cellular effect of drugs in relation to protein expression and function (pharmacoproteomics) may be able to overcome these obstacles, and allow the optimisation of cancer chemotherapy in association with a pharmacogenetic approach.

