
Vaccination usually means the immunization of persons or animals against foreign infectious organisms for disease prevention. However, it has now been demonstrated that immunization against certain self substances to which tolerance normally exists can elicit beneficial effects to humans and other animals without inducing autoimmune disease. Clinical trials in women have been conducted with vaccines against reproductive antigens for the prevention of pregnancy and research is under way to develop more advanced formulations. Other self antigens have been described that might be used for developing methods of immunological therapy for such diseases as cancer, ulcers, and complications of diabetes. Emphasis is placed on the need for careful studies in appropriate animal models before any clinical application of such procedures is suggested.

By deliberately upsetting the body's recognition of self, and inducing an immune response against specific self antigens, birth control vaccines and disease therapies may be possible.  The vaccine must be highly specific, the antigen must be present in small amounts or at limited times, and the benefit-to-risk ratio must be thoroughly evaluated.  Target antigens being considered for birth control vaccines include sperm antigens or enzymes, zona pellucida of the ova and the pituitary hormone hCG.  Anti-sperm immunity has been observed naturally occurring, and induced experimentally.  Anti-ovum vaccines have the drawback of possibly reacting with ovarian tissue.  The gonadotropin hormone receiving the most attention is hCG, or specifically its carboxy-terminal subunit.  The rest of the peptide is too similar to hLH.  Anti-hCG could act by preventing the luteotrophic effect of the hormone, or by attacking the hCG-producing cells of the blastocyst.  Vaccines based on hCG with a tetanus toxoid carrier and a synthetic hCG peptide vaccine have been tested successfully in Phase 1 clinical trials.  Other therapies based on immunization against self antigens include anticancer therapy, excess growth hormone and the Zollinger- Ellison syndrome of gastric ulcer disease.  All of these approaches need to be monitored carefully to ensure that no damage is done to the host from circulating immune complexes.

