
Several models for survivorship care are prominent within the cancer literature; however, there is little empirical research that examines what oncology clinicians perceive to be the best approach to caring for cancer survivors, what services survivorship programs should include, and how prepared they feel to care for cancer survivors.

An IRB approved web-based survey of all clinical staff was conducted at a NCI designated comprehensive cancer center with a 49.8% response rate (N  =  377). Data were summarized using frequencies and relative frequencies, and pairwise tests of statistical significance were utilized to evaluate differences between clinician type groups.

Overall, the largest proportion of respondents preferred a disease-specific survivorship model (37.6%). This preference was specifically observed in oncology physicians and nurses. When asked where specific survivorship services should be provided, respondents indicated a preference for services directly related to survivors' medical treatment (i.e. information about late effects) to be delivered in a disease-specific survivorship clinic, and ancillary services (i.e. nutrition and fertility counseling) to be housed in a centralized comprehensive survivorship clinic. Physicians felt that they have significantly more information, training, and resources to care for cancer survivors than did oncology nurses.

These results indicate that oncology clinicians prefer a combination of survivorship care delivery models where continuing medical needs are met in disease-specific clinics, and comprehensive wellness services are offered in a centralized comprehensive survivorship clinic. Results also suggest that planning for survivorship initiatives should include additional resources, education, and training for clinical staff.

These findings underscore the need for a universally accepted definition of cancer survivorship, and support a model for delivering care to cancer survivors that is a blend of the disease-specific and comprehensive survivorship programs.

