
In response to the evolution of the information-seeking behaviour of patients and concerns from health professionals regarding cancer patient information, the French National Federation of Comprehensive Cancer Centres (FNCLCC) introduced, in 1998, an information and education program dedicated to patients and relatives, the SOR SAVOIR PATIENT program (SSP). The methodology of this program adheres to established quality criteria regarding the elaboration of patient information. Cancer patient information, developed in this program, is based on clinical practice guidelines produced by the FNCLCC and the twenty French regional cancer centres, the National League against Cancer, The National Cancer Institute, the French Hospital Federation, the National Oncology Federation of Regional and University Hospitals, the French Oncology Federation of General Hospitals, many learned societies, as well as an active participation of patients, former patients and caregivers. The information and dialogue handbook SOR SAVOIR PATIENT Social aspects & cancer partly published in this edition of the Bulletin du cancer, provides specific information regarding patient social rights and benefits extracted from the texts of laws currently in force in France. It also relies on the handbook A "Prévoir Demain, La réinsertion des patients traités pour cancers A", realised in partnership with the FNCLCC, the Coloplast foundation for quality of life and the National League against Cancer. This document is available from the FNCLCC (101, rue de Tolbiac, 75013 Paris, Tel. (0033) 1 44 23 04 68, www.fnclcc.fr). The handbook A "Social aspects & cancer A" was worked out and published in 2004. Information may change with new legal regulations. It is therefore strongly advised to refer to the texts of laws in force to check for possible amendments. This article aims to help patients and relatives to be better aware of their social rights, to locate the different social and administrative services concerned (CAF, Cotorep, etc.) and to turn to the right person and the appropriate agency in the event of social difficulties during and after the disease. This document is designed to offer health professionals a validated information digest of all resources available in order to better communicate with the patient on social aspects of cancer.

