
Cancer stem cells in a tumor mass form a very small subpopulation ranging from below 0.1% in a brain tumor but they have the crucial ability to become malignant. The goal of cancer therapy has been the total killing of tumor cells. However we should clarify that most of all tumor cells are differentiated cancer cells. Thus the elimination of 99.9% of tumor cells under histological criteria cannot ensure the cancer will be cured. Rather cancer cell biologists should turn their attention to reprogramming cancer stem cells to normal stem cells by which malignancy recuperates normal organogenesis from the aspect of the dichotomy of cancer stem cell. The cue points underlying the reverse cancer stem cell at blastogenesis in inflammation site is depending upon cell-to-cell recognition of the tumor-niche cells. Normalization of tumor-niche promises to lead cancer stem cell into normal stem cell owing to autonomous healing mechanisms that reside in the self-defense mechanisms in immunity and the cell competition mechanisms in the wound healing of the tissue cells. Among the cyto-skeletal proteins, vimentin becomes a target of self-restoration of cancer stem cell by means of immune surveillance. A human monoclonal antibody, CLN-IgG recognizes vimentin expressing on the cell surface of the malignant tumor. Since vimentin network resides in the cytoplasm connecting the plasma membrane with chromatin assembly in the nucleus, it is highly likely vimentin plays an important role in up-regulation and down-regulation through signal transduction between certain membrane receptors and gene expression with respect to the transformation of the cell. Aberrant arrangement of vimentin undergoes malignancy accompanied by epithelial-mesenchymal-transition relating to the aberrant apoptotic cellular behavior in the tumor-niche. Restraint of the aberrant expression of vimentin on the plasma membrane of the malignant cell evokes a pertinent signal transduction pathway for healing that is an indication there must be a reverse path that reprograms cancer stem cells to normal organogenesis.

