
In a prospective study CT scanning was used to evaluate the precision of thermometry catheter placement in tumours in the head and neck or on the chest wall in 30 consecutive patients prior to hyperthermia treatment. Patients had variable-sized tumours from several primary sites. Thermometry catheter placement was guided by palpation with or without a prior CT scan. Catheter placement was confirmed by CT. All lesions were less than 8 x 8 x 6 cm (L x W x D) in size. A mean of 4.2 +/- 0.2 (+/- 1 SEM, range 2-7) closed-end polyurethane catheters were inserted orthogonally by the same experienced radiation oncologist. Horizontal thermometry catheters were intended to traverse the centre and base of the tumour mass, and a vertical catheter was often inserted to intersect a horizontal catheter. After catheter placement, wire cables with 1 cm spacings were inserted into the catheters and positions determined using orthogonal films and CT scans. The success of catheter placement was judged on the following criteria: (1) catheter distribution factor (CDF = proportion of tumour CT slices transected by at least one catheter); (2) catheter hit ratio (CHR = average number of catheters in tumour per CT slice); (3) catheter miss factor (CMF = average number of catheters out of tumour per CT slice); (4) catheter placement index, CPI = [(CHR)(CDF)]-CMF; and (5) distance of nearest catheter from the visually estimated centre of tumour in the most central tumour CT scan. In the first seven lesions with 3-6 cm depth catheter insertion was guided by palpation only. In the next 23 lesions catheter insertion was guided by a prior CT scan. In the latter group, 15 lesions had depth 3-6 cm while eight lesions had depth &lt; or = 3 cm. Catheter placement by palpation only, without the benefit of CT scan, was much less accurate in terms of the nearest catheter to the centre of the tumour (p = .001), the proportion of CT slices with catheter in tumour (CDF, p = 0.04) and the probability of a catheter being outside the tumour (CMF, p = 0.01). The catheter placement index (CPI) was a good measure of the accuracy and adequacy of catheter placement in large tumours (p = 0.04). Displacement of normal tissue structures by tumour precluded accurate catheter placement and led to a low CPI. It was difficult to accurately instrument lesions &lt; or = 3 cm depth even with the benefit of a prior CT scan.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

