
The importance of good doctor-patient communication is widely recognised. The aims of this study were to evaluate the immediate effects of the participation of patients with cancer on the attitudes and skills of undergraduate medical students receiving an interview skills training programme, and to assess the effects of the participation of patients with cancer on the attitudes and interview performance of students 2 years later. It was hypothesised that the participation of cancer patients would have specific beneficial effects on attitudes and interview performance. Before participating in a 6-session interview methods course in third year, students were randomised to be taught with patients who had cancer (experimental group) or with patients with other diagnoses (control group). Before and after participating in the course, 233 students (94% response rate) completed an Attitudes Questionnaire. When they reached their fifth year, 54 students again completed the Attitudes Questionnaire and, in addition, made a video recording of an interview with a patient who had gynaecological cancer. These recordings were rated independently by two researchers using the Interview Rating Instrument. Immediately after the course, a number of differences were found between the two groups. For example, students in the experimental group were more likely to consider the ability to listen an extremely important characteristic of hospital doctors and to consider more strongly that trust is an essential part of the doctor-patient relationship. 2 years after the course, the ability of hospital doctors to communicate with patients, and the need for clinical decisions to reflect patients' wishes, were considered to be more important by students in the experimental group, although even 96% of controls felt both these issues were very or extremely important. As hypothesised, the experimental group had better ratings in terms of responding empathically, showing regard and concern for the patient, and assessing the impact of the symptoms on the patient's life. The participation of patients with cancer has beneficial and enduring effects on the attitudes and interview performance of medical undergraduates. Medical schools should consider how best patients with cancer can make an important contribution to communication skills training.

