
Dolastatin (DOLA)-10 is a pentapeptide isolated from the mollusc Dolabella auricularia with clinically promising antitumor activity documented in various in vitro and in vivo tumor models. The objectives of this Phase I study were to determine the maximum tolerated dose, evaluate toxic effects, and document any antitumor activity of this novel agent. Using an electrospray ionization mass spectroscopy system, we also characterized the clinical pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and metabolism of DOLA-10. The maximum tolerated dose was reached at 300 microg/m2. Granulocytopenia, the dose-limiting toxicity, was documented in 33% of the patients treated at that dose level. There were no episodes of thrombocytopenia or severe anemia (Hgb &lt; 8), and no major nonhematological toxicity was observed. Stabilization of tumor growth was observed in four patients, but no objective responses were seen. Whereas a two-compartment model described the DOLA-10 plasma concentration-time data reasonably well, a three-compartment model consistently performed better. After a rapid distribution phase, DOLA-10 plasma levels declined with mean beta and gamma half-lives of 0.99 and 18.9 h, respectively. Significant interpatient and intrapatient variability in DOLA-10 plasma clearances was observed. The mean area under the concentration-time curve increased proportionally as the dose was escalated, but there was significant overlap between dose levels. The area under the concentration-time curve and the percentage of decline in neutrophils were correlated. A single DOLA-10 metabolite was detected in five patients. Unlike the in vitro studies of DOLA-10, the principal metabolite detected was an N-demethyl derivative, confirmed by mass spectroscopy. In all five subjects, the concentration of this metabolite never exceeded 2% of the simultaneously measured parent drug concentration. The available preclinical, pharmacological, and clinical data suggest that further study of escalated DOLA-10 dosing with cytokine support is warranted.

