
We have previously shown that human metallopanstimulin (MPS-1) is a 9.4-kDa multifunctional ribosomal S27/nuclear "zinc finger" protein which is expressed in a wide variety of actively proliferating cells and tumor tissues. Furthermore, we have shown that detection of MPS-N immunoreactive material in sera corresponding to the NH2 terminus of MPS-1 provides a method for determining the presence of certain types of abnormal proliferative conditions and/or active oncogenic processes in patients. In this study, we investigated MPS-N and MPS-N-like antigens present in the blood of patients with prostatic carcinoma (PC) and their relationship to the clinical status of patients with PC.

The presence of MPS-N immunoreactive material was determined using a sensitive and specific radioimmunoassay (RIA) which has been developed to measure circulating levels of MPS-N antigen(s). In addition, MPS-N levels were compared to the primary bio-marker used in PC patient management, Prostatic Specific Antigen (PSA).

MPS-N concentrations were determined in the blood of 107 males having no evidence of PC, and in 126 patients diagnosed with PC. In patients, not having PC the MPS-N levels were lower than 10 ng/mL. In untreated patients having PC stages T1/T2, the MPS-N level range was 10-30 ng/mL; in stages T3/T4 the MPS-N level range was 30-50 ng/mL; and in stage Mlb (distant metastasis to the bones) the MPS-N levels were extremely high (&gt; 50 ng/mL). In Mlb patients that did not respond to therapy, the MPS-N levels remained very high (&gt; 50 ng/mL). In Mlb patients that went into remission after treatment, the MPS-N levels were dramatically reduced. In addition, a comparison of the test properties of MPS-N and PSA for prostate cancer were evaluated in a total of 231 patients. In both the low and high value range, both MPS-N and PSA appear to be equally effective in modifying the probability of the target condition-prostatic cancer.

These findings show that (1) in untreated PC patients, the increase in serum MPS-N correlated with the stage of the disease; (2) MPS-N tumor marker predicted the degree of aggressiveness of tumor growth and response to therapy. In summary, despite the uncertainties of the relative contributions of the molecules being measured in cancer patients (authentic MPS-1, and MPS-N-like protein sequences), the MPS-N test is a pragmatic test that correlates well with active prostatic malignancy.

