
The manufacturer of the Today contraceptive sponge is confident that the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) will rule favorably when it answers recent inquiries about the sponge's safety.  According to Bruce Vorhauer, president and chairperson of the VLI Corporation, concerns of consumer groups are without foundation.  The groups filed formal petitions with the FDA in June asking that the agency prohibit the sale of the new contraceptive to the general public until further testing could be done.  At this time the sponge is being marketed in 12 Western states and is expected to be on the market in the East by November or December.  The sponge received FDA approval in April for safety and efficacy, but some groups are concerned that the device may contain carcinogenic ingredients in the polyurethane used to make the sponge itself as well as toxic ingredients in the spermicide used on the sponge.  The FDA has until December to answer the 2 petitions.  The agency backed the safety of the product at a congressional subcommittee hearing on July 13.  US Representative Ted Weiss specifically questioned the FDA on the potential presence of tolumenediamine (TDA) in the sponge polymer, as well as dioxane and ethylene oxide in the nonoxynol-9 spermicide.  Regarding the TDA question, Vorhauer said the tests that initially detected the presence of TDA were administered on a sponge polymer that differed from the polymer currently used in the product.  The nonoxynol-9 spermicide used in the Today sponge contains 7 ppm of 1,4 dixoane.  The FDA currently allows 10 ppm of the compound in such spermicides.  Finally, Vorhuer stated that ethylene oxide, found in nonoxynol-9 at concentrations of 5 ppm, does not survive the sponge's manufacturing process because it cannot coexist with water.  Judy Braiman Lipson, president of the Empire State Consumer Association in Rochester, New York, reports that the group fears the sponge may be a "tampon like device" and that there could be another toxic shock syndrome (TSS) tragedy.  She also spoke of her concern about inadequate surveillance of the product.  Despite the groups' questions about the safety of the sponge, the device will continue to be sold unless the FDA decrees otherwise.

