
Regional hyperthermia has potential for human cancer treatment, particularly in combination with systemic chemotherapy or radiotherapy. Heat enhances the cytotoxic effect of certain anticancer agents such as bleomycin, but the mechanisms involved in cell killing are currently unknown. Bleomycin generates reactive oxygen species. It is likely that hyperthermia itself also increases oxidative stress in cells. We evaluate whether oxidative stress has a role in the mechanism of cell death caused by bleomycin and heat in Chinese hamster ovary cells. Heat (41 to 44 degrees C) increased cytotoxicity of bleomycin, evaluated by clonogenic cell survival. Decreased levels of cellular antioxidants should create an imbalance between prooxidant and antioxidant systems, thus enhancing cytotoxic responses to heat and to oxidant-generating drugs. We determine the involvement of four major cellular antioxidant defenses, superoxide dismutase (SOD), the glutathione redox cycle (GSH cycle), catalase, and glutathione S-transferase (GST), in cellular sensitivity to bleomycin, alone or combined with hyperthermia. These cellular defenses were inhibited by diethyldithiocarbamate, l-buthionine sulfoximine, aminotriazole, and ethacrynic acid, respectively. We show that levels of antioxidants (SOD, GSH cycle, and GST) affect cellular cytotoxic responses to bleomycin, at normal and elevated temperatures (41 to 44 degrees C), suggesting the involvement of oxidative stress. Bleomycin and iron caused oxidative damage to membrane lipids in intact cells, at 37 and 43 degrees C. Lipid peroxidation was evaluated by fluorescence detection of thiobarbituric acid-reactive products. There was an increase in damage to membrane lipids when the antioxidant defenses, SOD and catalase, were inhibited. The differing effects of antioxidant inhibitors on bleomycin-induced cytotoxicity and membrane lipid damage suggest that different mechanisms are involved in these two processes. However, free radicals appear to be involved in both cases. The marked sensitization of cells by diethyldithiocarbamate, to both bleomycin-induced cytotoxicity and lipid peroxidation, suggests that superoxide could be involved in both of these processes.

