
Tumor hypoxia is an important prognostic factor for response to therapy. Radiolabeled 2-nitroimidazoles have been used for imaging hypoxia, and the octanol/water partition coefficient (P) of these compounds appears to play a crucial role in their suitability for imaging. A series of 11 2-nitroimidazoles coupled to peptidic chelators for (99m)Tc with divergent P was developed and evaluated in an in vitro system. Two classes of N(3)S chelators were used: dialkyl-Gly-Ser-Cys-linker-2-nitroimidazole (Class I) and dialkyl-Gly-Lys(2-nitroimidazole)-Cys (Class II). The chelators were prepared by automated solid-phase peptide synthesis. Xanthine oxidase was able to reduce the 2-nitroimidiazole moiety on the ligands, but the rate of reduction varied 5-fold among the different chelators. The chelators were labeled by transchelation from [(99m)Tc]gluconate at temperatures between 22 and 100 degrees C. The reaction mixtures were analyzed by HPLC and their P values determined. The accumulation of each complex in suspension cultures of Chinese hamster ovary cells incubated under aerobic or extremely hypoxic conditions was determined. Radiochemical yields ranged from 5 to 80% for the 11 compounds. HPLC showed that some of the compounds formed two complexes with (99m)Tc, possibly syn and anti conformations with respect to the Tc=O bond. In general, the Class I chelators labeled more readily than the class II chelators. The P values of the (99m)Tc complexes varied from 0.0002 to 5 and were generally in accordance with predictions based on structure. There were also differences in P as a function of pH; the free acids had a lower P at pH 7.4 than at pH 2.0 due to ionization, whereas the amides did not show this effect. Accumulation levels in aerobic cells were related to P but varied over a narrow range. Four of the 11 compounds showed selective accumulation in hypoxic cells. The peptidic class of 2-nitroimidazoles, with flexible design and convenient solid-phase synthesis, deserves further study as agents for imaging hypoxia in tumors.

