
In this study we tested some assumptions about the use of euphemism in communicating with cancer patients. Does an explicit statement about the diagnosis of cancer cause patients to respond with greater anxiety than when uncertainty or ambiguity is allowed to persist? Do patients believe they cope better with cancer when the diagnosis is explicit?

A heterogeneous sample of 165 cancer patients completed a new measure of emotional adjustment to cancer using random assignment among four testing variables: agent (self-report v interview), terminology (the words cancer v illness), identification (patient identified v anonymous), and supervision (clinic v home). Internal consistency (Cronbach's alpha) for the 39-item set was 0.74 and face and content validity were determined using the focus-group technique and preliminary factor analysis. After answering the adjustment measures, subjects completed the Spielberger State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI).

Overall anxiety levels were significantly lower in the sample than published norms for general medical and surgical patients. Exposure to the word cancer as distinct from illness increased anxiety, but did not alter adjustment scores. Supervision and agent conditions did not affect anxiety, but reported adjustment was poorer in the interview condition compared with the self-report condition. Ambiguous instructions, such as asking patients to complete the questionnaire anonymously but return it in person to staff in the clinic, resulted in poorer adjustment, which was reversed by the consistent instruction to complete the questionnaire anonymously at home and return it by mail.

Use of the word cancer generated anxiety to levels similar to those reported in general medical and surgical patients, but did not produce any distortion in reported adjustment. However, any ambiguity associated with the conditions under which adjustment is assessed may lead to distortion and an increase in the patient's reported psychologic distress.

