
Radiolabeled nucleosides, specifically 5-iodo-2'-deoxyuridine (IUdR) radioiodinated with the Auger-electronemitting 123I or 125I, have been shown to produce extensive DNA damage in mammalian cell systems in vitro. Such nucleosides are cycle-dependent agents that are taken up by mitotically dividing cells in the S phase of the cell cycle. The degree of damage that occurs is related to the fact that these nucleosides bind covalently to DNA bringing the decaying Augerelectron-emitting radionuclide in close proximity to the genome. The use of these radiohalogenated nucleosides in vivo is associated with several problems. The first relates to their extremely short biologic half-life in blood (T1/2 of minutes in humans). The second involves achieving therapeutic ratios in tumor cells in the face of efficient hepatic dehalogenation. The third concerns the uptake of these radiopharmaceuticals by actively proliferating normal cell renewal systems, thus potentially causing toxic side effects. The fourth, one shared with other cycle-dependent drugs, relates to the matter of labeling the whole tumor cell population. To facilitate targeting to tumors, investigators have been examining the direct introduction of these agents into the targeted area or into an arterial blood supply that immediately precedes the target. For example, radiopharmaceutical administration could be intracavitary (bladder, spinal fluid, peritoneum), intralesional (brain tumor, breast mass) or intra-arterial (liver, pancreas). In all these situations, the following conditions must be met: (a) once within the vicinity of the tumor the agent can freely diffuse through the tissues and is selectively taken up by cancerous cells; (b) once the agent has left the target area it is converted quickly into a nontoxic form and/or excreted from the body; and finally, (c) the biologic behavior of the agent is not altered by repeated injections. We report herein our experience and that of others with [123I/125I/131I]IUdR in cultured cells, animal tumor-model systems, and patients. In vitro, DNA incorporation of 123I- and 125I-labeled IUdR leads to an exponential decrease in cell survival (no shoulder on the survival curve). However, the total number of decays needed to produce a given lethal effect with [123I]IUdR is approximately twice that required with [125I]IUdR. In vivo, the scintigraphic and antineoplastic capabilities of radioiodinated IUdR have been demonstrated in an intraperitoneal murine ovarian tumor model following intraperitoneal injection; in an intracerebral rat gliosarcoma model after intracranial administration; in an intrathecal rat gliosarcoma model after intrathecal infusion; and in a rat transitional cell bladder cancer model following intravesicular infusion. [123I]IUdR, [125I]IUdR, and/or [131I]IUdR have been administered to patients with brain, breast, colorectal, or gastrointestinal cancers (intratumorally); ovarian cancer (intraperitoneally); bladder cancer (intravesically); liver metastases from colorectal cancer (through the hepatic artery, permanent intra-arterial catheter). These studies have confirmed the observations made in animal models. The data indicate that 5-iodo-2'-deoxyuridine radiolabeled with an Auger electron emitter (123I or 125I) may be a useful agent for the scintigraphic diagnosis and/or therapy of neoplastic diseases that are accessible to direct radiopharmaceutical administration. This radiopharmaceutical should serve as a prototype for, and facilitate the development of, other radiolabeled nucleoside analogs. Further investigations are certainly warranted.

