
Pentosan polysulfate (xylanopolyhydrogensulfate) is a semi-synthetic sulfated heparinoid polysaccharide which has been used as an anticoagulant for nearly thirty years in Europe. It antagonizes the binding of bFGF to cell surface receptors and has thus been evaluated for antitumor activity in several animal models and human tumor cell lines. In two angiogenic models pentosan has been shown to inhibit bFGF stimulation of angiogenesis. Previous clinical studies have determined the coagulation effects of pentosan to be the dose-limiting toxicity.

We conducted a phase I study designed to define the duration-limiting toxicity associated with progressive prolongation of a continuous intravenous infusion (three, five, and eight weeks). This study was not designed to escalate the dose of pentosan beyond that required to maintain the activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) between 1.8 and 2.2 times the baseline value.

Thirteen patients with advanced stage metastatic cancer were enrolled (median age 50 years, range 34 to 61 years). Four patients were treated in cohort #1 (three weeks of infusional therapy), five patients were treated in cohort #2 (five weeks of therapy), and four patients in cohort #3 (eight weeks of therapy). All patients experienced a progressive prolongation of their aPTT and PT. Furthermore, all patients experienced at least grade I thrombocytopenia. Other complications were, in general, mild. One patient developed grade III liver abnormalities while receiving the eight-week infusion and another patient developed grade IV thrombocytopenia while receiving the same regimen. One patient with colon cancer had stable disease for 24 weeks, while the remaining 12 patients had no objective evidence of response.

Pentosan was well tolerated when doses were adjusted for aPTT prolongations and a five-week cycle appeared to be the maximum tolerated duration of infusion (initially 4 mg/kg/day). One patient had stable disease, but there was no objective tumor response noted in the remaining 12 patients.

