
The aim of this investigation was to evaluate the relationship between the disease-specific activity of cytotoxic drugs in the clinic and in fresh human tumour cells from patients, as detected by a non-clonogenic cytotoxicity assay. The activity of 18 different cytotoxic drugs in fresh human tumour cells ex vivo was analysed in up to 15 samples from each of 13 different diagnoses using the fluorometric microculture cytotoxicity assay (FMCA). For each drug and diagnosis, relative activity indices (RAIs) were calculated, defined as the fraction of samples within the diagnosis having a survival index (SI) less than the median SI for the drug in all tested samples. Clinical response rates for the drug in the same diagnoses were collected from published phase II trials and were compared with the RAIs using Spearman's rank correlation (Rho) and Pearson's correlation coefficient (R). Correlation coefficients could be calculated for 12 drugs. The coefficients varied between 0.02 and 0.92 (Rho) and between 0.07 and 0.91 (R), but for most drugs the correlation between RAI and clinical response rates was good, with Rho &gt; 0.6 and R &gt; 0.7. Weak correlations were observed for cyclophosphamide and vincristine (Rho = 0.32 and 0.16, respectively), which might be due to old clinical data, and for paclitaxel (Rho = 0.02), which perhaps could be explained by in vitro activity of the solvent, Cremophor EL. The 18 drugs were also categorised according to their suggested clinical use in solid or haematological tumours, and were then compared regarding the activity in solid compared with haematological tumours ex vivo, expressed as the ratio between the number of responders among solid and haematological tumours (S/H ratio). The mean ex vivo S/H ratios in the group of drugs registered for use in haematological tumours was only 0.09 and was significantly different (P = 0.05) from the mean S/H ratios for the drugs used in both haematological and solid tumours (0.31) and in solid tumours only (0.47). Furthermore, the FMCA could identify the 50% most and least sensitive diagnoses with respect to clinical phase II activity with 74% (78/106) correct classifications. The results indicate that the relative activity of cytotoxic drugs in different diagnoses may be detected by the FMCA. Thus, 'phase II trials ex vivo' using non-clonogenic cytotoxicity assays might be used to make clinical trials more effective by targeting trials to diagnoses in which a new agent is most likely to be active.

