
In spite of the numerous reports indicating the presence of humoral immunosuppressive factors in cancer patients, only a few of these factors have been biochemically identified. Furthermore, their role as effective immunosuppressors in vivo remains to be established. Our laboratory has attempted to isolate and identify the major immunosuppressive factor in the malignant effusions derived from ovarian and lung cancer patients. We have previously demonstrated that the Mr 52,000 immunosuppressive factor isolated from the ascites fluid of an ovarian cancer patient inhibited T-dependent immune responses in vivo and in vitro including the inhibition of E-rosetting. Thus, this immunosuppressive factor was named "suppressive E-receptor" (SER). Our current study demonstrates that this SER factor purified from malignant effusions derived from ovarian, lung, or head and neck cancer patients had a common component which dissociated equally into Mr 38,000-42,000 and 17,000-19,000 moieties on sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis under vigorous reducing conditions. Electroelution of these two components followed by a limited amino acid sequence determination revealed these two components to have N-terminal amino acid sequences identical to the beta and alpha 2 subunits of normal adult haptoglobin. Immunoelectrophoresis of SER using a polyclonal antiserum to neonatal cord blood demonstrated that SER, unlike normal haptoglobin, has slower electrophoretic mobility than the normal adult haptoglobin. Western blotting analysis of SER separated on sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis under denaturing conditions failed to recognize a monoclonal antibody directed specifically to SER. However, this monoclonal antibody exclusively reacted with the SER separated by an analytical polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis gel under nondenaturing conditions while normal adult haptoglobins or purified but denatured haptoglobin obtained from the same malignant fluid as SER all failed to react with this antibody. Thus, SER appears to bear an additional epitope(s) that is absent in normal adult haptoglobin. Since the SER as well as the neonatal haptoglobin have at least 100 to 1000-fold more potent immunosuppressive activity than the normal adult haptoglobin, this additional epitope(s) present in SER may be responsible for the potent immunosuppressive property of SER.

