
The "Standards, Options and Recommendations" (SOR) project, started in 1993, is a collaboration between the Federation of French Cancer Centres (FNCLCC), the 20 French cancer centres, and specialists from French public universities, general hospitals and private clinics. The main objective is the development of clinical practice guidelines to improve the quality of health care and the outcome of cancer patients. The methodology is based on a literature review and critical appraisal by a multidisciplinary group of experts, with feedback from specialists in cancer care delivery.

To update the Standards, Options and Recommendations clinical practice guidelines for the use of recombinant erythropoietin (epoietin alpha and beta darbepoietin-alpha, EPO) in the management of anaemia in oncology. To define, on the basis of the critical appraisal of the best available evidence and expert agreement, the clinical situations in which the administration of rHuEPO is indicated, and those in which it is not indicated, except in the setting of randomised controlled trial.

The working group identified the questions requiring up-dating from the previous guideline. Medline and Embase were searched using specific search strategies from January 1999 to October 2002. Literature monitoring was performed to identify randomised clinical trials published between October 2002 to November 2003. In addition several Internet sites were searched in October 2002.

A total of 36 new references, corresponding to 30 randomised clinical trials, were identified. The role of rHuEPO is certain when the haemoglobin concentration is below 10 g/dL, but remains uncertain when the concentration is between 10 g/dL and 12 g/dL. When the haemoglobin concentration is between 12 g/dL and 14 g/dL there is no justification to use rHuEPO to prevent anaemia, except in the setting of autologous blood transfusion programmes before major surgery. No anti-anaemic treatment is justified if the haemoglobin concentration is higher than 14 g/dL, except in the setting of a randomised clinical trial.

