
In this paper on "The Evolution of Paediatric Oncology Over the Years", a historical perspective is outlined regarding the subspecialty of paediatric oncology on a global basis. The evolution of paediatric oncology units and their role in the progress of cancer management in children is highlighted. It is noted that success in the management of cancer in adults has followed the footsteps of breakthroughs and success in paediatric oncology. The epidemiology of cancer in children in sub-Saharan African and the development of paediatric oncology are also highlighted. The development of a paediatric oncology unit at the Kenyatta National Hospital in Nairobi, Kenya has been focused on, pointing out challenges, constraints and success that are associated in the initiation and nurturing of such units in developing countries. Lastly, Burkitt's lymphoma is singled out for discussion to illustrate problems that are abound in cancer management in children in sub-Saharan Africa.

Childhood cancers differ from adult cancers in the pattern and frequency of the various types; childhood malignancies may have different etiological factors of prominent genetic component and they respond to therapy better than malignancies in adults.  Success in managing cancer in adults has followed breakthroughs in pediatric oncology.  A historical overview is presented on a global basis of this subspeciality of pediatric oncology.  Sections consider pediatric oncology units and data collection, the general management of pediatric tumors, and the treatment of pediatric malignancy in Kenya.  The author specifically highlights the evolution of pediatric oncology units and their role in the progress of cancer management in children, and the epidemiology of cancer in children in sub-Saharan Africa.  The etiology and care of Burkitt's lymphoma is considered as an example of the serious problems that may be encountered in managing cancer in children in sub-Saharan Africa.  The experience of developing a pediatric oncology unit at Kenyatta National Hospital in Nairobi, Kenya, is also cited as an example of the challenges, constraints, and successes associated with such activities in developing countries.  Finally, while much progress has been made in the field of pediatric oncology, further advances remain to be made.

