
The objective of this study was to assess the eligibility for and the course of compulsory military service of childhood cancer survivors.

The medical, military recruitment, conscription, and military service data of male Finnish childhood cancer survivors were collected from manually filed records. Inclusion criteria were: survivors born 1977 or earlier, treated for a malignancy between birth and age 15 years, and followed by a pediatrician until at least age 18 years. The documents of 207 survivors from the Pediatric Clinics of Finnish University Hospitals were examined, and 130 of these survivors were considered eligible for military service. Demographic factors, the predictors of fitness for military service, factors associated with service interruption, the attained level of military training, and the health status of conscripts during service were evaluated. Comparisons were made with the Finnish male population of the same age and with conscripts serving at the corresponding time.

Approximately 60% of studied survivors were enlisted. Positive predictors of fitness for service were year of birth of 1973 or later (odds ratio [OR], 3.2), height at call-up age of 170-174.9 cm (OR, 3.6), and the man's own positive opinion of his fitness for service (OR, 62.3). Negative predictors were age at diagnosis &gt; or = 11 years (OR, 0.5), central nervous system radiotherapy (OR, 0.3), limb defects (OR, 0.02), and the group of sequelae concerning neurologic, cardiopulmonary, and gastrointestinal systems, or secondary malignancies (OR, 0.3). Survivors interrupted their service more often (20%) (P &lt; 0.001). Leukemia survivors were less likely to interrupt their service (7%) compared with other survivors (P = 0.04). Factors associated with service interruption were: diagnosis (P = 0.04), the man's own opinion of his fitness for service (P = 0.013), surgery (P = 0.003), and height (P = 0.049), weight (P = 0.019), and body mass index (P = 0.035) at the beginning of military service. The attained level of military training was equal to that of controls. The survivors visited the garrison physician less frequently in total (mean, 5.9 times) (P &lt; 0.001), visited because of infections as much as controls, and were off duty more (mean, 11.9 days) (P = 0.012) than controls.

The current study found that childhood cancer survivors were less likely to meet the requirements set for military service in Finland. The causes of rejection usually were obvious, but approximately 30% were rejected merely on the basis of a former cancer diagnosis. However, enlisted survivors coped well with military service if their treatment sequelae were taken into consideration carefully at the time of enlistment. Vocational opportunities within the armed forces might be an appropriate career option even for survivors of childhood malignancies.

