
There has been a growing interest in the combined effects of noise and vibration. In a population of aeronautical workers diagnosed with vibroacoustic disease (VAD), a large incidence of malignancy was detected. These workers were exposed to large pressure amplitude (LPA) (&gt; or = 90 dB SPL) noise, with energy content concentrated within the low frequency (LF) bands (&lt; or = 500 Hz) and whole-body vibration (WBV). To our knowledge, there are no studies conducted in humans or animals that address the issue of the potential genotoxic effects of vibration combined with noise. In the present study, the levels of sister chromatid exchanges (SCE) and of cells with high frequencies of SCE (HFC) were analyzed in peripheral blood lymphocytes of workers employed in various occupations within the aeronautical industry.

SCE and HFC were analyzed in lymphocytes of 50 workers occupationally exposed to noise and vibration and of 34 office-worker controls (G0). The exposed group included: 10 hand-vibrating tool operators (G1), 15 engine test cell technicians (G2), 12 aircraft run-up technicians (G3) and 13 Portuguese Air Force helicopter pilots (G4). Groups 2-4 were exposed to WBV and LPALF noise; group 1 was exposed to LPA high frequency noise and local vibration. Statistical analysis of the mean SCE count per cell was carried out by multiple regression analysis comparing various predictor variables: type of exposure, duration of exposure, age, and cigarette consumption.

Only cigarette consumption and type of exposure were found to be significantly correlated with the mean SCE frequency. After allowing for the effects of smoking, the analysis indicates that: 1) there was no significant difference between G1 and G0 (p &gt; 0.05); 2) the differences between G2 and G0, G3 and G0, G4 and G0 were all highly significant (p &lt; 0.001); 3) there was no significant difference between G2 and G3 (p &gt; 0.05), nor between G2 and G3 combined and G4 (p &gt; 0.05); and 4) G2 and G4 combined had a significantly elevated mean SCE frequency compared G0 (p &lt; 0.001). Statistical analysis of the proportion of HFC was consistent with these results.

Our data suggest that occupational exposure to LPALF noise and WBV may lead to increased levels of SCE in men. These results also suggest a reason for the high incidence of malignancy in VAD patients. The observed effects may not reflect a direct action of these physical agents on DNA. Alternative explanations may lie in the noise-, vibration-, and/or stress-induced pathophysiological changes.

