
Somatostatin receptors (SR) are surface markers characterizing not only APUDomas associated with neuroendocrine identities but also malignancies without neuroendocrine expression. Recently, the somatostatin analog pentetreotide was labeled with In-111 (OctreoScan 111, Mallinckrodt Medical BV, Petten, Holland) and introduced for the in vivo visualization in man of SR-positive tissues. In the present report, SR-specific scintigraphy is evaluated as a clinical tool for tissue characterization in correlation with histological and radiological examinations. Scintigraphy was focused and performed in cancer types without neuroendocrine tissue expression such as brain (n = 6) and breast tumors (n = 9) and lymphomas (n = 5). Scintigraphy was performed for comparison at 6 and 22 h after i.v. application of 111 MBq (3 mCi) of In-111-Pentetreotide. In the breast cancer group, the primary tumor was visualized in all 9 women as well as in all 4 cases with palpable axillary lymph nodes. Three women with a negative axillary node scan and impalpable nodes had positive biopsy. In two cases, mediastinal lymph node involvement was observed. So far the role of SR-positive breast cancer (BC) scans remains unknown. It is tempting to speculate that in resected women who are histologically and scintigraphically SR positive, it might be of value in the early detection of symptom-free recurrences. High densities of SR were present within both meningiomas, the high-grade astrocytoma and the craniopharyngioma. Differentiation of low- and high-grade astrocytomas could not be successfully achieved because both grades showed intense radioactivity uptake, even though high-grade tumors lack SR. The latter might be due to the damaged blood-brain barrier and the poor radioactivity washout observed in high-grade astrocytomas. All five lymphomas could be detected due to the presence of activated lymphocytes and macrophages that express SR at a sufficient density. In conclusion, SR scintigraphy in non-neuroendocrine malignancies does not seem to be reliable for an initial tumor staging but rather more suitable for a tissue characterization and extremely useful for monitoring changes of SR expression after treatment.

