
To calculate the cancer incidence in the region surrounding Schiphol.

Descriptive epidemiological study based on cancer registry data.

Comprehensive Cancer Centre Amsterdam. The Netherlands.

Using noise levels expressed as Kosten-cenheden (Ke) of the air traffic around Schiphol (Amsterdam International Airport) as well as 4-digit postal code areas, two study areas were defined, a central area and an adjacent zone. All cancer cases diagnosed in 1988-1993 in the study areas were selected from the population-based Amsterdam Cancer Registry. Observed numbers of cancer cases were compared with expected numbers on the basis of national and regional cancer incidence rates.

Cancer incidence (4535 cases) in 1988-1993 in the Schiphol region was slightly higher than national incidence rates (observed/expected (O/E) ratio: 1.93; 95% confidence interval; 1.00-1.06) and almost equal to regional rates. This was largely due to relatively high rates for breast (O/E ratio: 1.08) and prostate (O/E ratio: 1.11) cancer in the Schiphol region as well as in the total area covered by the Amsterdam Cancer Registry. In addition, leukaemia, lymphoma/multiple myeloma and bladder cancer were more frequent, the last-named especially in males. The incidence of cancer of the respiratory tract was not the same in the central area and the adjacent zone. As compared with national rates, it was increased in the central area (O/E ratio: 1.19), while it was decreased in the adjacent zone (O/E ratio: 0.86). The incidence of cancer of all sites (O/E ratio: 1.10) was also increased in the central area, largely due to smoking related cancers.

During 1988-1993, cancer incidence in the area surrounding Schiphol was a little higher than the national incidence rates and almost equal to the regional incidence. We could not demonstrate an association between air traffic and increased cancer risk. It is most likely that the differences for certain types of cancer as well as those between the two study areas were due to differences in lifestyle, such as smoking habits.

