
To briefly review scientific rationale of 3D conformal radiation therapy (3DCRT) and discuss the prospects, opportunities, and challenges in the implementation of 3DCRT. Some of these ideas were discussed during a workshop on "Implementation of Three-Dimensional Conformal Radiation Therapy" in April 1994 at Bethesda, MD, and others have been discussed elsewhere in the literature.

Local-regional control of cancer is an important component in the overall treatment strategy in any patient with cancer. It has been shown that failure to achieve local-regional control can lead to (a) an increase in chances of distant metastases, and (b) a decrease in the survival. In many disease sites, the doses delivered currently are inadequate to achieve satisfactory local tumor control rates; this is because in many sites, only limited doses of radiotherapy can be delivered due to the proximity of cancer to radiosensitive normal tissues. By conforming the radiotherapy beams to the tumor, doses to the tumors can be enhanced and doses to the normal tissues can be reduced. With the advances in 3DCRT, such conformation is possible now and is the rationale for using 3DCRT. However, a number of questions do remain that are not limited to the following: (a) What are the implications in terms of target volume definitions when implementing 3DCRT? (b) Are there some sites where research efforts can be focused to document the efficacy and cost effectiveness of 3DCRT? (c) How do we implement day-to-day 3DCRT treatment efficiently? (d) How do we transfer the technology from the university centers to the community without compromising quality? (e) What are all the quality assurance/quality improvement questions that need to be addressed and how do we ascertain quality assurance of 3DCRT? (f) Have we looked at cost-benefit ratios and quality of life (QOL) issues closely?

There is a need for defining multiple target volumes: gross tumor volume, clinical target volume(s), and planning target volume(s). Such definitions should make implementation of 3DCRT more complex, yet will make high-dose delivery a possibility. There are many sites in which single and multiinstitutional studies are ongoing that include prostate, lung, head and neck, and brain. In other areas, cooperative group trials are required because of the inability of single institutions to accrue enough patients to answer clinically relevant questions with statistical validity. Although implementation of 3DCRT will require multiple steps, these multiple steps can be brought into clinical practice gradually and one does not have to wait until all steps required for implementation of 3DCRT are available. In this respect, "3DCRT" should be used in a very broad sense, from beam's eye view blocking, use of multibeam dose distribution, use of dose-volume histograms in choosing alternative plans, noncoplanar beam arrangements, intensity modulation, inverse planning, to totally automated implementation of 3DCRT. To transfer the 3DCRT capabilities to the community from the University Centers, there is a necessity to develop quality assurance programs. RTOG and the Three-Dimensional Oncology Group are spearheading these efforts. Three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy has potential not only to improve local control and decrease toxicity, but also to improve the cost benefit ratio in the use of radiotherapy as well as in improving quality of life in patients with cancer.

Achieving many potential benefits of 3DCRT (improvement in local control, decreasing toxicity, organs-function preservation, improvement in cost effectiveness) will require further physics-related and clinical research in carefully conceived and successfully completed future clinical trials.

