
Combination therapy of cisplatin with interferon alpha (IFN) has been shown in several in vitro as well as in vivo models to be synergistic. In order to decrease toxicity seen with cisplatin, 5-day continuous infusions, in place of bolus administration, have been introduced. This led us to investigate the combination of 5-day continuous infusion cisplatin with repeated IFN dosing in a phase I cisplatin dose escalation study. A group of 17 patients were enrolled in this trial. The maximum tolerated dose (MTD) of cisplatin was 20 mg/m2 per day when combined with 3 x 10(6) units IFN given three times a week. The dose-limiting toxicities seen included thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, and nausea and vomiting. Pharmacokinetic analyses of free (unbound or ultrafilterable) platinum revealed that the decay curve fitted a monoexponential model. Pharmacokinetic parameters of cisplatin were found to correlate with toxicity. Both increases in the maximum concentration of cisplatin achieved (Cpmax) as well as the area-under-the-curve (AUC) for free platinum, correlated with the incidence of nausea and vomiting (both acute and delayed) and hematological toxicities (leukopenia and thrombocytopenia). None of the patients exhibited significant changes in renal function while on this study. The free platinum levels were higher than found in similar studies evaluating comparable cisplatin infusions alone. The enhanced toxicities seen in this trial may be explained by the results of an in vitro study using human plasma spiked with cisplatin and IFN that revealed decreased protein binding of cisplatin by 2.5-3.0-fold. Of the 17 patients treated, two non-small cell lung cancer patients obtained a partial response and one malignant melanoma patient obtained complete resolution of a malignant pleural effusion. Considering the acceptable toxicity seen in this trial, we recommend phase II trials be conducted with continuous infusion cisplatin with IFN in the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer.

