
The inability to sensitively detect metastatic cells in preclinical models of cancer has created challenges for studying metastasis in experimental systems. We previously developed a flow cytometry (FCM) method for quantifying circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in mouse models of breast cancer. We have adapted this methodology for analysis of tumor dissemination to bone marrow (BM) and lymph node (LN), and for analysis of these samples by laser scanning cytometry (LSC). Our objective was to implement these methodologies for characterization of tumor cell dissemination in preclinical models of cancer metastasis. Human cancer cells were injected into mice via mammary fat pad (MFP; spontaneous metastasis), tail vein (TV; targets lung), or intracardiac (IC; targets bone) routes. At several time points postinjection (4 h to 8 weeks), mice were sacrificed and blood, LNs, and BM were collected. Samples were immunomagnetically enriched and labeled with human leukocytic antigen-fluorescein isothiocyanate and CD45-PE antibodies (FCM/LSC), and propidium iodide (FCM) prior to quantitative analysis. Following MFP injection, CTCs increased over time, as did disseminated cells to the LN. Interestingly, tumor cells also spontaneously disseminated to BM, peaking at 2 weeks postinjection. Following TV injection, CTCs were initially high but decreased rapidly by 1 week before increasing to peak at endpoint. Combined with an observed concurrent increase in disseminated cells to LN and BM, this suggests that tumor cells may shed into the circulation from lung metastases that establish following initial cell delivery. Following IC injection, CTCs increased over time, peaking at 4 weeks. Tumor cells in the BM (most prevalent site of metastasis after IC injection) remained at moderate levels until peaking at endpoint. Combined use of FCM and LSC allows sensitive quantification of disseminated tumor cells in preclinical models of metastasis. These methods will be valuable for future studies aimed at testing new therapeutics in the metastatic setting.

