
Prescribing for older patients is challenging and complex. Cancer patients are at a considerable increased risk of drug-related problems because they typically receive a large number of medications during their cancer treatment, both for the cancer itself and for supportive care. Few studies have examined the scope of this problem in older newly diagnosed cancer patients.

To investigate the number and severity of potential drug problems and factors associated with the occurrence of potential drug problems in older newly diagnosed cancer patients.

This prospective pilot study was conducted in newly diagnosed cancer patients aged &gt; or =65 years recruited in the Segal Cancer Centre, Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Vigilance Santé software was used to identify the presence and type of potential drug problems. Logistic regression analyses were used to identify factors associated with the presence of one or more severe or moderately severe potential drug problems.

There were 112 participants with a mean age of 74.2 years, and 70% were women. A total of 103 patients (92%) were taking medications. The median number of medications per patient was 5 (interquartile range 3-9) and a total of 247 potential drug problems were identified. Sixty-four patients (62.1%) had a potential drug problem of any level of severity and 49 patients had a potential moderate/severe drug problem identified (47.6%). Two (0.8%) potential drug problems of the most severe level were identified, 122 warnings (49.4%) of all potential problems were of moderate severity and 123 warnings (49.8%) were at the least severe level. Factors associated with having one or more moderate/severe potential drug problems were taking five or more drugs and age &gt; or =76 years.

The majority of older newly diagnosed cancer patients in this study were taking at least one medication and the median number of medications per patient was 5. Published studies have shown that medication problems are common in community-dwelling older persons, but they are mostly of low severity. In this group of older newly diagnosed cancer patients, potential medication problems were also found to be common; however, half of the potential problems identified were of moderate severity.

