
Rab proteins are small GTPases required for vesicle trafficking through the secretory and endocytic pathways. Rab GDP-dissociation inhibitor (rab-GDI) regulates Rab protein function and localization by maintaining Rab proteins in the GDP-bound conformation. Two isoforms of rab-GDI are present in most mammalian cells: GDI-1 and GDI-2. It has recently been demonstrated that a Heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) chaperone complex regulates the interactions between Rab proteins and Rab-GDI-1. The AR42J cell line is derived from rat pancreatic exocrine tumor cells and develops an acinar-like phenotype when treated with dexamethasone (Dex). The aim of the present study was to examine the expression of rab-GDI isoforms and Hsp90 in AR42J cells in the presence or absence of Dex. Rab-GDI:Hsp90 interactions were also examined. Both rab-GDI isoforms were detected in AR42J cells by immunoblotting. In Dex-treated cells, quantitative immunoblotting revealed that rab-GDI-1 expression increased by 28%, although this change was not statistically significant. Rab-GDI-2 levels were unaltered by Dex treatment. Approximately 21% rab-GDI-1 was membrane associated, whereas rab-GDI-2 was exclusively cytosolic. Dex treatment did not affect the subcellular distribution of rab-GDI isoforms. Hsp90 was present in the cytosolic and membrane fractions of AR42J cells and co-immunoprecipitated with cytosolic rab-GDI-1. Moreover, density gradient centrifugation of AR42J cell membranes revealed that Hsp90 and rab-GDI-1 co-localize on low- and high-density membrane fractions, including amylase-containing secretory granules. The Hsp90 inhibitor, geldanamycin, inhibited CCK-8-induced amylase release from these cells in a dose-dependent manner. Our results indicate that as AR42J cells differentiate into acinar-like cells, rab-GDI isoform expression and localization is not significantly altered. Moreover, our findings suggest that Hsp90 regulates agonist-induced secretion in exocrine cells by interacting with rab-GDI-1.

