
To explore the regulation mechanism of survivin gene, the NB4 and HL-60 cells were used in experiments, the cell culture in vitro and cell morphological observation were performed and survivin mRNA expression was detected by semi-quantitative RT-PCR. The results showed that the survivin expression in NB4 cell was positive. By treatment of 1 micromol/L ATRA, cell differentiation antigen CD11b was gradually increased ([chi = 47.002, P = 0.000) and CD33 was gradually decreased (chi = 1.614, P = 0.806) with time. Simultaneously, survivin mRNA expression was down-regulated and the cell cycle was arrested at G(0)-G(1) phase (chi = 58.566, P = 0.000). ATRA could down-regulate the survivin mRNA expression of HL-60 cell, but G-CSF, GM-CSF and PHA could up-regulate the survivin expression of HL-60 cell. The cytokine could regulate survivin expression in gene transcription level. The up-regulation of survivin expression was observed while HL-60 cell was stimulated by PHA. The survivin gene expression could be blocked by the survivin antisense oligonucleotide. The survivin mRNA expression of NB4 cell was inhibited by 100 nmol/L-1000 nmol/L survivin antisense oligonucleotide in a dose-dependent manner. The survivin mRNA expression in the NB4 cell was obviously inhibited in 600 nmol/L survivin AS-ODN groups (38%) while the AS-ODN dose increases, the inhibition rate does not descend, but was not inhibited in the control groups, liposomes groups and ODN groups. After NB4 cell was treated by survivin AS-ODN, the typical morphological changes for the apoptosis emerged in NB4 cell. These changes were not found in control groups. It is concluded that PHA, GM-CSF and G-CSF can up-regulate the survivin gene expression, but survivin AS-ODN and ATRA can down-regulate survivin gene expression. The cell cycle arrest at G(0)-G(1) phase while the survivin gene expression was down-regulated by ATRA. It suggested that the survivin gene expression is very related to cell cycle. The morphological changes of cell apoptosis can be observed when the survivin gene expression of NB4 cell was suppressed.

