
Endothelin 1 (ET-1) is overexpressed in cancer, contributing to disease progression. We previously showed that ET-1 stimulated proliferative, migratory, and contractile tumorigenic effects via the ET(A) receptor. Here, for the first time, we evaluate zibotentan, a specific ET(A) receptor antagonist, in the setting of colorectal cancer, in cellular models. Pharmacologic characteristics were further determined in patient tissues. Colorectal cancer lines (n = 4) and fibroblast strains (n = 6), isolated from uninvolved areas of colorectal cancer specimens, were exposed to ET-1 and/or ET(A)/(B) receptor antagonists. Proliferation (methylene blue), migration (scratch wounds), and contraction (gel lattices) were assessed. Receptor distribution and binding characteristics (K(d), B(max)) were determined using autoradiography on tissue sections and homogenates and cytospun cells, supported by immunohistochemistry. Proliferation was inhibited by ET(A) (zibotentan > BQ123; P < 0.05), migration by ET(B) > ET(A), and contraction by combined ET(A) and ET(B) antagonism. Intense ET-1 stromal binding correlated with fibroblasts and endothelial cells. Colorectal cancer lines and fibroblasts revealed high density and affinity ET-1 binding (B(max) = 2.435 fmol/1 × 10(6) cells, K(d) = 367.7 pmol/L; B(max) = 3.03 fmol/1 × 10(6) cells, K(d) = 213.6 pmol/L). In cancer tissues, ET(A) receptor antagonists (zibotentan; BQ123) reduced ET-1 binding more effectively (IC(50): 0.1-10 μmol/L) than ET(B) receptor antagonist BQ788 (∼IC(50), 1 mmol/L). ET-1 stimulated cancer-contributory processes. Its localization to tumor stroma, with greatest binding/affinity to fibroblasts, implicates these cells in tumor progression. ET(A) receptor upregulation in cancer tissues and its role in tumorigenic processes show the receptor's importance in therapeutic targeting. Zibotentan, the most specific ET(A) receptor antagonist available, showed the greatest inhibition of ET-1 binding. With its known safety profile, we provide evidence for zibotentan's potential role as adjuvant therapy in colorectal cancer.

