
Scatter factor (hepatocyte growth factor) and its receptor c-Met are increasingly expressed during progression from low-grade to high-grade gliomas. Scatter factor/c-Met signaling induces glioma cell motility, invasion, angiogenesis and resistance to DNA-damaging agents. The latter is relevant to the understanding of the resistance of human gliomas to chemotherapy and radiotherapy. The goal of this study was to identify a set of genes that may contribute to scatter factor-mediated protection of U373MG cells against cis-platinum, a DNA cross-linking agent. We used DNA microarray assays, confirmatory semiquantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis and functional assays to identify genes involved in the scatter factor-induced resistance of U373MG to cis-platinum. We identified a group of genes that are overexpressed in cells treated with scatter factor plus cis-platinum relative to cells treated with cis-platinum alone and confirmed some of these gene expression alterations by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Inhibiting the expression of three of these genes--polycystic kidney disease 1, amplified in breast cancer 1 and DEAD/H box helicase 21--using small interfering RNAs reduced survival of cis-platinum-treated cells and partially reversed the scatter factor protection against cis-platinum. Dominant-negative Akt and IkappaB super-repressor expression vectors inhibited the scatter factor protection, and abrogated the ability of scatter factor to alter the expression of DEAD/H box helicase 21 and polycystin (PKD1) within the context of cis-platinum exposure. The Akt and nuclear factor-kappaB inhibitors had no effect on amplified in breast cancer 1 expression. These studies implicate DEAD/H box helicase 21, polycystin (PKD1) and amplified in breast cancer 1 as novel transcription-dependent regulators of scatter factor-mediated glioma cell protection against cytotoxic death, and identify other potential regulators for future study.

