
2-Amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (PhIP) is one of the mutagenic heterocyclic amines derived from cooked meat. In previous animal studies, spontaneous tumour formation in B6(Min/+) mice was associated with somatic loss of the wild-type Apc+ allele by loss of the entire chromosome 18 or by recombination. The objective of this study was to examine genetic changes caused by PhIP-exposure in a mouse intestinal cell line and in tumours from hybrid mice by keeping track of the chromosomes carrying the two Apc alleles. We transformed the SV40 T-immortalised intestinal epithelial cell line IMCE, derived from the B6(Min/+) mice by exposure to N-OH-PhIP, and studied the effect on Apc status and chromosome 18. Eighteen transformed cultures were obtained and all of them had retained the Apc+ allele. Five of seven transformed cultures were tumorigenic after implantation in nude mice. Chromosomal analysis of these five cultures and the parent IMCE cell line showed that the IMCE cells were near-tetraploid with an average of 77 chromosomes/cell, while the tumorigenic cell cultures were all triploid to hyper-triploid with a range of 61-69 chromosomes/cell. The number of copies of chromosome 18 was about four in the IMCE line and this copy number was retained in the transformed lines derived from IMCE. Changes in chromosome 18 and Apc during tumour development in vivo were examined in spontaneously formed and PhIP-induced intestinal tumours from two hybrid mice strains, i.e. B6(Min/+) - a murine FAP model - crossed with either AKR/J or A/J. We evaluated the allelic status of Apc, and the heterogenic microsatellite markers D18Mit19 and D18Mit4, located at the upper and lower ends of chromosome 18, respectively. In tumours from untreated animals, instability in the D18Mit19 and Apc was observed. Upon PhIP exposure, the B6(Min/A+) hybrid mouse tumours differed distinctly in genetic profile from those obtained from untreated animals and we detected three genetically different tumour groups, all of which had apparently retained Apc+. One group had allelic balance between the Apc(Min) and Apc+, the second had allelic imbalance between the Apc and D18Mit4 alleles, indicative of chromosomal stability in the first group and instability in the lower end of chromosome 18 in the second group, respectively. The third group showed variable allelic status of the three markers. A similar change in genetic profile was also seen in intestinal tumours of PhIP-exposed B6(Min/AKR+) hybrid mice, but it was less pronounced. Chromosomal breaks and/or recombinational events could be alternative explanations for the observed allelic imbalances in chromosome 18 markers in intestinal tumours from PhIP-exposed mice.

