
The alkaline Comet assay is a widely used single cell gel electrophoresis technique for the quantification of DNA strand breaks, crosslinks and alkali-labile sites induced by a series of physical and chemical agents. DNA migration in an electric field, supposed proportional to strand breakage, is a proposed estimation of genotoxicity. Breaks are quantified from geometric and fluorescence measurements by image analysis of comet-shaped DNA, often reported parameters being tail DNA and tail moment. Although a variety of statistical approaches have been used in the literature, most of these do not take into account the distribution patterns of comet data. In order to investigate a methodology for statistically demonstrating a comet effect, two different experiments, a reproducibility study and a trend analysis, were undertaken on a murine lymphoma cell line (P388D1) photodynamically stressed after induction of porphyrins with delta-aminolaevulinic acid. This treatment results in significant heterogeneity of DNA damage, producing values ranging from 0 to 100% tail DNA in the same sample. The comparison of distribution curves for stressed and non-stressed samples shows that none of the application conditions are verified, either for parametric tests (which require normal distributions), or non-parametric tests (which assume essentially similar distributions). Meaningful statistics (median and 75th percentile) were consequently extracted from repeated experiments and found suitable for comparing stress conditions in an ANOVA and in a trend analysis; the 75th percentile is theoretically more sensitive but tends to more rapidly saturate at extensive stress levels. We conclude that a trend analysis of median comet metrics from repeated experiments at different stress levels is certainly an efficient way to statistically demonstrate a genotoxic effect. Whether the considered comet parameter is tail DNA or tail moment had no influence on the conclusions of our experiments, which were carried up to stress levels leading to a median 70% tail DNA.

