
FoxM1 has been shown to play a critical role in the pathogenesis of various epithelial malignancies. However, its role in lymphoid malignancies has not been fully clarified. We, therefore, investigated the role of FoxM1 expression in a large cohort of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma samples and panel of cell lines.

FoxM1 expression was investigated in a large series of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma tissues in a tissue microarray format by immunohistochemistry. Apoptosis was measured by flow cytometry and protein expression was detected by immunoblotting using diffuse large B-cell lymphoma cell lines following treatment with either pharmacological inhibitor of FoxM1 or small interference RNA knockdown strategy. Invasion/migration and soft agar colony assays were also performed following treatment with FoxM1 inhibitor.

FoxM1 expression was detected in 84.6% of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma tumors and found to be significantly associated with proliferative tumor marker Ki67 ( p<0.0001), matrix metalloproteinases-2 (P=0.0008), matrix metalloproteinases-9 (P=0.0002), S-phase kinase associated protein-2 ( p<0.0001) and inversely associated with p27 expression (P=0.0215). Expression of small interference RNA targeted against FoxM1 or treatment of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma cells with thiostrepton caused its downregulation accompanied by decreased expression of matrix metalloproteinases-2 and matrix metalloproteinases-9. Inhibition of FoxM1 in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma cells also decreased invasive and migratory capability, and induced caspase dependent apoptosis via activation of the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway. Finally, combined thiostrepton and bortezomib at sub-toxic doses led to efficient apoptosis in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma cells.

Altogether, these results suggest that FoxM1 is over-expressed in the majority of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma samples. These data also indicate that targeting FoxM1 signaling can serve as a potential therapeutic modality in the management of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

