
In the 21st century, drug development has shifted toward larger molecules such as proteins and nucleic acids, which require the use of new chemical strategies. In this process, the drug delivery system plays a central role and intracellular targeting using nanotechnology has become a key technology for the development of successful new medicines.  We have developed a new delivery system, a multifunctional envelope-type nanodevice (MEND) based on "Programmed Packaging." In this new concept of packaging, multifunctional nanodevices are integrated into a nanocarrier system according to a program designed to overcome all barriers during the course of biodistribution and intracellular trafficking. In this Account, we introduce our method for delivering nucleic acids or proteins to intracellular sites of action such as the cytosol, nucleus, and mitochondria and for targeting selective tissues in vivo via systemic administration of the nanodevices.  First, we introduce an octaarginine-modified MEND (R8-MEND) as an efficient intracellular delivery system, designed especially for vaccinations and transgene expression. Many types of cells can internalize the R8-MEND, mainly by inducing macropinocytosis, and the MEND escapes from macropinosomes via membrane fusion, which leads to efficient antigen presentation via the major histocompatibility complex I pathway in antigen-presenting cells. In addition, the transfection activities of the R8-MEND in dividing cells, such as HeLa or A549 cells, are as high as those for adenovirus. However, because the R8-MEND cannot induce sufficient transgene activity in primary cultured dendritic cells, which are critical regulators of the immune response, we converted the R8-MEND into a tetralamellar MEND (T-MEND). The T-MEND uses a new packaging method and delivers condensed pDNA into the nucleus via fusion between the envelopes and the nuclear membrane.  To achieve efficient transfection activity, we also optimized the decondensation of nucleic acids within the nucleus. To optimize mitochondrial drug delivery, we introduced the MITOPorter. Many types of materials can be packaged into this liposome-based nanocarrier and then delivered to mitochondria via membrane fusion mechanisms. Finally, we describe an integrated strategy for in vivo tumor delivery and optimization of intracellular trafficking. Successful tumor delivery typically requires coating the surfaces of nanoparticles with PEG, but PEG can also limit uptake by the reticuloendothelial system and reduce the efficiency of intracellular trafficking. Here we integrate the optimum biodistribution and intracellular trafficking of the MEND with an innovative strategy such as enzymatically cleavable PEG and a short membrane peptide, GALA. Some of these strategies will soon be tested in the clinic.

