
GH binds dimerized GH receptors (GHRs) to form a trimolecular complex and induces downstream signaling events. The mechanism by which GH binding converts the inactive predimerized GHR to its active signaling conformation is uncertain. GH has no axis of symmetry. Its interaction with GHR is mediated by two asymmetric binding sites on GH, each with distinct affinity. Site 1 is of high affinity and is thought to mediate the first binding step. Mutation of binding site 2 (as in the human GH mutant, G120R) disrupts the second binding but leaves site 1 binding intact. G120R is a GH antagonist; it binds only one GHR and thus fails to signal, and it prevents productive GHR binding by normal GH. We previously demonstrated that prolactin receptor signaling was achieved by a dimeric version of a prolactin antagonist. We now employ assays of cellular signaling and receptor conformational changes to examine whether GH molecules harboring two site 1 regions can trigger GHR activation. We used recombinantly produced GH-GH and G120R-G120R dimers in which monomers in tandem are connected by a short linker peptide. Rabbit GHR-expressing human fibrosarcoma cells (C14) were treated with GH, G120R, GH-GH, or G120R-G120R. As expected, GH and GH-GH, but not G120R, induced GHR disulfide linkage, as assessed by anti-GHR blotting of cell extracts resolved by SDS-PAGE under nonreducing conditions. Disulfide linkage of GHRs reflects attainment of the active signaling conformation. Likewise, GH and GH-GH, but not G120R, caused Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) and signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) activation. Notably, G120R-G120R, despite its lack of an intact site 2 in either dimer partner, also promoted GHR disulfide linkage and JAK2 and STAT5 activation, albeit less potently than either GH or GH-GH. Time-course responses of the three agonists were similar in terms of JAK2 and STAT5 activation. Pretreatment of cells with our conformation-sensitive inhibitory monoclonal antibody, anti-GHR ext-mAb, prevented ligand-induced receptor activation for all three agonists. GHR was also rendered less immunoprecipitable by anti-GHR ext-mAb after treatment with these agonists. These results are important in that they indicate that a ligand with two intact binding sites 1 causes GHR to adopt similar conformational changes as does GH and thus triggers activation of JAK2 and downstream signaling. Furthermore, we infer that there is substantial flexibility in the GHR extracellular domain, such that it productively accommodates GH dimers that are much larger than GH.

