
The neurotoxin, 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) has been implicated in the neurodegenerative process of Parkinson's disease. The current study was designed to elucidate the toxicological effects of 6-OHDA on energy metabolism in neuroblastoma (N-2A) cells. The toxicity of 6-OHDA corresponds to the total collapse of anaerobic/aerobic cell function, unlike other mitochondrial toxins such as MPP+ that target specific loss of aerobic metabolism. The toxicity of 6-OHDA paralleled the loss of mitochondrial oxygen (O2) consumption (MOC), glycolytic activity, ATP, H+ ion gradients, membrane potential and accumulation of the autoxidative product, hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). Removing H2O2 with nonenzymatic stoichiometric scavengers, such as carboxylic acids, glutathione and catalase yielded partial protection. The rapid removal of H2O2 with pyruvate or catalase restored only anaerobic glycolysis, but did not reverse the loss of MOC, indicating mitochondrial impairment is independent of H2O2. The H2O2 generated by 6-OHDA contributed toward the loss of anaerobic glycolysis through lipid peroxidation and lactic acid dehydrogenase inhibition. The ability of 6-OHDA to maintain oxidized cytochrome c (CYT-C-OX) in its reduced form (CYT-C-RED), appears to play a role in mitohondrial impairment. The reduction of CYT-C by 6-OHDA, was extensive, occurred within minutes, preceded formation of H2O2 and was unaffected by catalase or superoxide dismutase. At similar concentrations, 6-OHDA readily altered the valence state of iron [Fe(III)] to Fe(II), which would also theoretically sustain CYT-C in its reduced form. In isolated mitochondria, 6-OHDA had negligible effects on complex I, inhibited complex II and interfered with complex III by maintaining the substrate, CYT-C in a reduced state. 6-OHDA caused a transient and potent surge in isolated cytochrome oxidase (complex IV) activity, with rapid recovery as a result of 6-OHDA recycling CYT-C-OX to CYT-C-RED. Typical mitochondrial toxins such as MPP+, azide and antimycin appeared to inhibit the catalytic activity of ETC enzymes. In contrast, 6-OHDA alters the redox of the cytochromes, resulting in loss of substrate availability and obstruction of oxidation-reduction events. Complete cytoprotection against 6-OHDA toxicity and restored MOC was achieved by combining catalase with CYT-C (horse heart). In summary, CYT-C reducing properties are unique to catecholamine neurotransmitters, and may play a significant role in selective vulnerability of dopaminergic neurons to mitochondrial insults.

