
Complexes of vanadyl(IV) with 4 monosaccharides and 5 disaccharides were tested in 2 osteoblast-like cell lines (MC3T3E1 and UMR106). Many complexes caused stimulation of UMR106 proliferation (120% basal) in the range of 2.5 to 25 micromol/L. In the nontransformed osteoblasts, some vanadyl-saccharide complexes stimulated the mitogenesis (115% basal) in the same range of concentration. The glucose and sucrose complexes were the most efficient inhibitory agents (65% and 88% of inhibition vs. basal, respectively) for tumoral cells at 100 micromol/L. The galactose and turanose complexes exerted a similar effect in the nontransformed osteoblasts. On the other hand, all the complexes promoted the phosphorylation of the extracellular regulated kinases (ERKs). All together, these results indicate that the stimulation of ERKs is not the only factor that plays a role in the proliferative effects of vanadium derivatives since some compounds were inhibitory proliferating agents. Cell differentiation was evaluated by alkaline phosphatase specific activity and collagen synthesis in UMR106 cells. All the complexes inhibited alkaline phosphatase activity, with galactose complex as the most effective compound (IC50 = 43 micromol/L). The complex with the trehalose TreVO was the most effective agent to stimulate collagen synthesis (142% basal) and glucose consumption (132% basal). A cytosolic tyrosine protein kinase and the kinase-3 of glycogen synthase seem to be involved in the stimulation of glucose consumption by vanadium derivatives. In this series, only TreVO gathered the characteristics of a good insulin mimetic and osteogenic drug. In addition, this complex was a good promoting agent of nontransformed osteoblast proliferation, whereas it inhibited tumoral osteoblasts. GluVO, the complex with glucose, was also more toxic for tumoral than for nontransformed cells. These 2 vanadium derivatives are good potential antitumoral drugs. All the results suggest that the biological effects of vanadium compounds are a complex phenomenon influenced by the complexation, the dose, and the nature of the ligands and the cells.

