
Some tuber-bearing wild potato species are reportedly higher in potential health-promoting traits, such as antioxidant activity (AOA) and total phenolic content (TP), than commercial cultivars; therefore, they could be used as parental material in breeding for high AOA and TP. However, using wild species might result in progenies that are toxic for human consumption because of the presence of high total glycoalkaloids (TGAs) and other unknown compounds. Therefore, wild potato accessions should be screened for cytotoxicity before their introduction into breeding programs. The objective of this study was to investigate antiproliferative activity and cytotoxicity of tuber extracts from 15 Solanum jamesii accessions on human HT-29 colon and LNCaP prostate cancer cell lines in vitro. Also, correlations among AOA, TP, TGA, and antiproliferative activity were determined. The tuber extracts significantly inhibited proliferation of HT-29 and LNCaP cell lines and were not cytotoxic to the cells compared to the control (DMSO). The antiproliferative activity exhibited by tuber extracts was not due to necrosis, because the amount of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) released from cells incubated with the extracts was not significantly different from that released from cells incubated without extracts (control). Colon cancer cells were more responsive to tuber extract treatment than prostate cancer cells. In both HT-29 and LNCaP cells, there were no observable significant correlations between antioxidant activity (DPPH and ABTS) and inhibition of cell proliferation or between TP and cell proliferation inhibition. Also, glycoalkaloids did not exhibit significant correlations with the inhibition of cancer cell proliferation. Findings of this study show that S. jamesii accessions probably pose no cytotoxic effects when used as parental material in improving the nutritional value of potato cultivars. Correlation results, along with cell proliferation data, suggest that not only the compounds measured in this study but also other bioactive compounds present in the matrix acting additively or synergistically may be more responsible for the antiproliferative effects of potato tuber extracts than higher concentrations of a single or group of compounds.

