
The multilayers of poly(L-lysine) (PLL) and hyaluronic acid (HA) were constructed by alternating deposition of PLL at high pH and HA at low pH. The exponential growth of the multilayer was proved to be amplified by increasing the pH difference between the two deposition solutions. The exponential growth multilayers of PLL/HA assembled at different pH were utilized as reservoirs for loading a trans-activating transcriptional factor (TAT) peptide. The confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) results indicated that the FITC-labeled TAT could diffuse throughout the exponentially growing PLL/HA film. The amount of peptide embedded within multilayer could be adjusted by both multilayer assembly pH and the TAT loading pH. Compared with (PLL/HA 6.5/6.5)5 multilayer (PLL/HA a/b means that the multilayer film was constructed by using PLL at pH a and HA at pH b), the (PLL/HA 9.5/2.9)5 film can be loaded with more TAT peptide at the same loading pH 6.5. The excess of positively charged TAT peptide within (PLL/HA 9.5/2.9)5 film could not only be ascribed to its extraordinary thickness but also be attributed to its uncompensated negative charge density enhanced by the pH difference between film buildup and peptide loading process. Increasing of the TAT loading pH from 6.5 to 9.5, which increases the pH difference between multilayer assembly and peptide loading process, enhances the uncompensated charge density within (PLL/HA 9.5/2.9)5 film and elevates the peptide density from 13.8 to 25.0 microg/cm2. Compared with direct layer-by-layer assembly of TAT and HA, the postdiffusion of TAT into (PLL/HA 9.5/2.9)5 film was loaded much more peptide. The postdiffusion of peptide into a rapid growth multilayer can be more favorable to load and sustainedly release functional oligo-peptide. The cell culture results indicated that the TAT embedded within the film maintained the ability to traverse across the Hep G2 cell membrane. The functionalized (PLL/HA 9.5/2.9)5 TAT 9.5 film was more efficient than the equivalent amount of free TAT peptide in the TAT uptake test. The postdiffusion of oligo-peptide within an exponential growth multilayer can serve as an effective approach for localized and sustained peptide delivery.

