
To find the optimal proportion of Composite Fructus Psoralea and Fructus Cnidii (CFPC) for inhibiting the bone metastasis of breast cancer by way of exploring its acting mechanism viewing from OPG/RANKL/RANK system.

The human bone metastasis of breast cancer model was established by injecting tumor cells of MDA-MB-231BO cell line into the left cardiac ventricle of nude mice. The modeled mice were randomly divided into seven groups: the blank group administered with normal saline by gastrogavage, the positive control group with zoledronic acid via peritoneal injection, and the 5 tested group with CFPC in different proportions of Fructus Psoralea and Fructus Cnidii, i.e., (A, 4:0; B, 3:1; C, 1:1; D, 1:3, and E 0:4), given by gastric infusion. The treatment started from 1 week after modeling and lasted for six weeks. By the end of the experiment, the metastatic foci in bone were imaged by radionuclide tracing method and X-ray photograph, and separated for detecting gene and protein expressions of osteoprotegerin (OPG), receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappaB ligand (RANKL), interleukin-8 (IL-8), parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP), macrophage colony stimulating factor (MCSF) by Real-time PCR and Western blot respectively.

Inhibition of bone metastasis gene was displayed to some extent in all the tested groups treated with CFPC, showing an increased level of OPG mRNA expression (It was 60.343 +/- 6.274 in the tested group C), and decreased mRNA expressions of IL-8, PTHrP, MCSF, RANKL (218.010 +/- 12.802, 232.399 +/- 14.354, 319.831 +/- 5.322, and 195.701 +/- 4. 862, respectively in the tested group C). The optimal effect was shown in the tested group C, showing significant difference to that in the blank group (P < 0.01). Meanwhile, the OPG in the bone metastatic foci could be up-regulated and protein expressions of RANKL/IL-8/PTHrP/MCSF down-regulated in all the tested groups. The optimal effect was shown in the tested group C, with significant difference from those of the normal saline group.

CFPC could inhibit the bone metastasis of breast cancer through activating OPG/RANKL/RANK pathway. Among different proportions of Fructus Psoralea and Fructus Cnidii, 1:1 was the best one.

