
In order to investigate the mechanisms by which 1alpha,25(OH)2 vitamin D3 (VD3) stimulates the differentiation of human osteoblasts, we cultured MG-63, which is a human osteoblastic cell line, in the presence or absence of VD3 and/or L-ascorbic acid 2-phosphate (Asc 2-P), a long-acting vitamin C derivative. The cell growth rate was decreased by the presence of VD3 in the culture medium. Type I collagen synthesis and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, which are markers of early stage osteoblast differentiation, were stimulated by the presence of VD3 as well as by that of Asc 2-P. The co-presence of Asc 2-P and VD3 had a synergistic effect on the collagen synthesis and ALP activity of the cells. Inhibition of collagen synthesis by the addition of inhibitors of collagen synthesis to the medium attenuated the stimulative effect of VD3 and Asc 2-P on the ALP activity. Transfection of the cells with siRNA-expressing vectors for COL1A1 decreased the expression level of ALP mRNA in addition to that of COL1A1. On the other hand, ALP activity was significantly increased, and the growth rate was decreased, when the cells were cultured on type I collagen-coated dishes. These effects were not seen when the cells were cultured on dishes coated with heat-denatured collagen. VD3 also increased the mRNA levels for Runx2 and osterix, which are transcription factors critical for osteoblast differentiation, as well as those of differentiation markers such as bone/liver/kidney type ALP, COL1A1, (the gene for the alpha1 chain of type I collagen), and osteocalcin, in the cells. Normal human osteoblasts and human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (hBMSC) showed quite similar responses to VD3. These results indicate that VD3-stimulated gene expression of type I collagen and that mature type I collagen produced in the presence of Asc 2-P mediates at least a part of the stimulative effects of Asc 2-P and VD3 on the differentiation of these human osteoblastic cells. Levels of mRNAs for ALP and COL1A1 were increased, but the level of Runx2 was decreased, by the expression of osterix in MG-63 cells. These results also suggest that VD3 controls the growth and differentiation of human osteoblastic cells by regulating the gene expression of osteoblast-related transcription factors as well as that of type I collagen, and that the co-presence of both signals is essential for VD3 to express full activity toward the differentiation of human osteoblasts.

