
Growth of epidermoid carcinoma cell lines, A431 and KB, has been known to be controlled by the interaction of epidermal growth factor (EGF) and its receptor (EGFR) with tyrosine kinase. Ganglioside GM3 was previously found to interact with EGFR and to inhibit EGFR tyrosine kinase. However, motility of these cells, controlled by EGFR and ganglioside, was not studied. The present study is focused on the control mechanism of the motility of these cells through interaction of ganglioside, tetraspanin (TSP), and EGFR. Key results are as follows: (i) The level of EGFR expressed in A431 cells is approximately 6 times higher than that expressed in KB cells, and motility of A431 cells is also much higher than that of KB cells, yet growth of A431 cells is either not affected or is inhibited by EGF. In contrast, growth of KB cells is enhanced by EGF. (ii) Levels of TSPs (CD9, CD82, and CD81) expressed in A431 cells are much higher than those expressed in KB cells, and TSPs expressed in A431 cells are reduced by treatment of cells with EtDO-P4, which inhibits the synthesis of glycosphingolipids (GSLs) and gangliosides. (iii) These TSPs are co-immunoprecipitated with EGFR in both A431 and KB cells, indicating that TSPs are closely associated with EGFR. (iv) High motility of A431 cells is greatly reduced, while low motility of KB cells is not affected, by treatment of cells with EtDO-P4. These results, taken together, suggest that there is a close correlation between high motility of A431 cells and high expression of EGFR and TSPs, and between ganglioside GM3/GM2 and TSP. A similar correlation was suggested between the low motility of KB cells and low levels of EGFR and TSP. The correlation between high motility and high level of EGFR with the ganglioside-TSP complex in A431 cells is unique. This is in contrast to our previous studies that indicate that motility of many types of tumor cells is inhibited by a high level of CD9 or CD82, together with growth factor receptors and integrins.

