
The inability to successfully treat women with ovarian cancer is due in large part to the advanced stage of disease at diagnosis, the development of platinum resistance, and the lack of sensitive methods to monitor tumor progression and response to treatment. Vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) is expressed on the mesothelium of ovarian cancer patients. We investigated VCAM-1 expression as a marker of peritoneal metastasis and tumor response to platinum-based chemotherapy.

Peritoneal or omental biopsies obtained from women diagnosed with stage I, stage II, or stage III/IV ovarian cancer were evaluated by immunohistochemistry. The effects of carboplatin on mesothelial VCAM-1 expression were determined in cultured cells by Western blot. Radiolabeled VCAM-1-specific peptide imaging probes and SPECT were used in a mouse model of ovarian cancer peritoneal metastasis to identify VCAM-1 as a viable imaging target.

VCAM-1 expression correlated with tumor stage. All specimens from stage I patients were negative, whereas 29% of stage II patients and 73% of stage III/IV patients were positive. Although most women with advanced stage disease expressed VCAM-1, the incidence of expression was reduced among women who received neoadjuvant chemotherapy, suggesting a role for chemotherapy in regulating VCAM-1 expression. Treatment of mesothelial cells in culture with carboplatin resulted in a transient decrease in VCAM-1 expression 4 h after treatment that returned to baseline within 16-24 h. In vivo imaging of VCAM-1 also demonstrated an acute decrease in expression 4 h after carboplatin administration that recovered within 48 h in mice harboring platinum-resistant tumors. Chronic VCAM-1 expression reflected the effect of platinum-based treatment on tumor burden. Specifically, carboplatin treatment of mice with platinum-sensitive tumors showed reduced VCAM-1 expression, which correlated with reduced tumor burden; mice with platinum-resistant tumors retained elevated VCAM-1 expression and tumor burden after treatment.

Clinically relevant VCAM-1-specific imaging probes identify VCAM-1 expression as an indicator of ovarian cancer peritoneal metastasis and therapeutic response to platinum-based agents. These observations support testing the utility of VCAM-1 imaging probes to monitor treatment response in ovarian cancer patients, thus providing the potential to improve management of women with this disease.

