
Magnetic nanoparticle hyperthermia consists of an increase of the temperature of magnetic nanoparticles (heat centres) due to the interaction of their magnetic moments with an alternating magnetic field. In vivo experiments using this method usually use a few fibre-optic thermometers inserted in the animal body to monitor the heat deposition. As a consequence, only a few points of the 3D temperature distribution can be monitored by this invasive procedure. It is the purpose of this work to show that non-invasive infrared thermography is able to detect, in real time, magnetic nanoparticle hyperthermia as well as monitor the harmful field-induced eddy currents in a murine model with a subcutaneous tumour. This surface temperature measurement method has the potential to give information about the intratumoral temperature.

The non-invasive magnetic hyperthermia experiments were performed at 300 kHz in non-uniform field configuration conditions in healthy mice and murine tumour induced by sarcoma S180. A soft ferrite-based biocompatible magnetic colloid consisting of manganese-ferrite nanoparticles surface-coated with citric acid were used in the experiments, which were extensively characterised by several techniques (transmission electron microscopy (TEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM)). The amplitude of the alternating magnetic fields was obtained from measurements using an AC field probe at similar experimental conditions. The temperature measurements were obtained from an infrared thermal camera and a fibre-optic thermometer.

Three-minute magnetic hyperthermia experiments revealed surface temperature increase as high as 11 °K in healthy and (5 °K in S180 tumour) animals when injecting subcutaneously 2 mg of magnetic nanoparticles (86 μL of magnetic fluid), in contrast to around 1.5 °K (for healthy) and 2.5 °K (for cancerous) animals in experiments without the colloid due to field-induced eddy currents at the animal surface. The thermographic temperature measurements were found to agree with the fibre-optic measurements within a 5% error, and were associated with the skin emissivity angle of dependence in the experimental set-up. On the other hand, a 30-min magnetic nanoparticle hyperthermia revealed surface temperature increases as high as 12 °K close to the injection site, while above 2-3 cm no significant temperature increase was observed. Curiously, the intratumoral temperature, monitored by a fibre-optic sensor, was found to be almost the same as the thermal camera surface temperature after achieving an equilibrium temperature regime. From the observed isotherms at the animal surface, using an analytical heat conduction model, taking into account surface conductance, we estimate a magnetic heating power of 0.45 W/cm(3) and a specific loss power (SLP) of 85 W/g for a field of the order of only 10 kA/m at the injection site region.

The results indicate that infrared thermography may be a promising tool for both early cancer detection and for hyperthermia treatment (at least for subcutaneous tumours), since the method permits access to information about the intratumoral temperature during a real-time magnetic hyperthermia as well as to estimate the in vivo nanoparticles SLP.

