
The mechanism by which chronic treatment with HIV (human immunodeficiency virus)-1 protease inhibitors leads to a deterioration of glucose metabolism appears to involve insulin resistance, and may also involve impaired insulin secretion. Here we investigated the long-term effects of HIV-1 protease inhibitors on glucose-stimulated insulin secretion from beta cells and explored whether altered insulin secretion might be related to altered insulin signaling. INS-1 cells were incubated for 48 h with different concentrations of amprenavir, indinavir, nelfinavir, ritonavir or saquinavir, stimulated with 20 mM d-glucose, and insulin determined in the supernatant. To evaluate insulin signaling, cells were stimulated with 100 nM insulin for 2 min, and insulin-receptor substrate (IRS)-1, -2 and Akt phosphorylation determined. Incubation for 48 h with ritonavir, nelfinavir and saquinavir resulted in impaired glucose-induced insulin secretion at 2.5, 5 and 5 microM respectively, whereas amprenavir or indinavir had no effects even at 20 and 100 microM respectively. The impaired insulin secretion by ritonavir, nelfinavir and saquinavir was associated with decreased insulin-stimulated IRS-2 phosphorylation, and, for nelfinavir and saquinavir, with decreased insulin-stimulated IRS-1 and Thr308-Akt phosphorylation. No such effects on signaling were observed with amprenavir or indinavir. In conclusion, certain HIV-1 protease inhibitors, such as ritonavir, nelfinavir and saquinavir, not only induce peripheral insulin resistance, but also impair glucose-stimulated insulin secretion from beta cells. With respect to the long-term effect on beta-cell function there appear to be differences between the protease inhibitors that may be clinically relevant. Finally, these effects on insulin secretion after a 48 h incubation with protease inhibitor were associated with a reduction of the insulin-stimulated phosphorylation of insulin signaling parameters, particularly IRS-2, suggesting that protease inhibitor-induced alterations in the insulin signaling pathway may contribute to the impaired beta-cell function.

