
In a variety of cell types, insulin stimulation elicits the rapid production of H(2)O(2), which causes the oxidative inhibition of protein-tyrosine phosphatases and enhances the tyrosine phosphorylation of proteins in the early insulin action cascade (Mahadev, K., Zilbering, A., Zhu, L., and Goldstein, B. J. (2001) J. Biol. Chem. 276, 21938-21942). In the present work, we explored the potential role of insulin-induced H(2)O(2) generation on downstream insulin signaling using diphenyleneiodonium (DPI), an inhibitor of cellular NADPH oxidase that blocks insulin-stimulated cellular H(2)O(2) production. DPI completely inhibited the activation of phosphatidylinositol (PI) 3'-kinase activity by insulin and reduced the insulin-induced activation of the serine kinase Akt by up to 49%; these activities were restored when H(2)O(2) was added back to cells that had been pretreated with DPI. Interestingly, the H(2)O(2)-induced activation of Akt was entirely mediated by upstream stimulation of PI 3'-kinase activity, since treatment of 3T3-L1 adipocytes with the PI 3'-kinase inhibitors wortmannin or LY294002 completely blocked the subsequent activation of Akt by exogenous H(2)O(2). Preventing oxidant generation with DPI also blocked insulin-stimulated glucose uptake and GLUT4 translocation to the plasma membrane, providing further evidence for an oxidant signal in the regulation of the distal insulin-signaling cascade. Finally, in contrast to the cellular mechanism of H(2)O(2) generation by other growth factors, such as platelet-derived growth factor, we also found that insulin-stimulated cellular production of H(2)O(2) may occur through a unique pathway, independent of cellular PI 3'-kinase activity. Overall, these data provide insight into the physiological role of insulin-dependent H(2)O(2) generation, which is not only involved in the regulation of tyrosine phosphorylation events in the early insulin signaling cascade but also has important effects on the regulation of downstream insulin signaling, involving the activation of PI 3'-kinase, Akt, and ultimately cellular glucose transport in response to insulin.

