
A major mechanism guiding neural development is through cell-cell and cell-matrix adhesions and signaling mediated by cell adhesion molecules (CAMs). The majority of CAMs have been grouped into three families: the cadherins, the integrins and the members of the immunoglobulin superfamily including L1. While the elucidation of new receptors and matrix components has become a frequent occurrence, the elucidation of the mechanisms by which they operate, and the function of those mechanisms in complex developmental events remains rudimentary. Members of all three families participate in differential adhesion, signal transduction and physical/mechanical effects. Each of these modes of action is a potential target for developmental neurotoxicants. In this brief review, the role of L1 in normal and abnormal neurodevelopment will be summarized. L1 is a cell surface transmembrane glycoprotein with a single copy gene on the X chromosome. There are two alternatively spliced exons, with the RSLE containing form found only on axons and growth cones of post-mitotic neurons. L1 mediates the following functions: adhesion, neurite extension, neuronal migration, and axon fasciculation. L1 is critical for normal neural development; humans with genetic defects in L1, termed corpus callosum hypoplasia, mental retardation, adducted thumbs, spasticity and hydrocephalus (CRASH) syndrome, and mice lacking expression of L1 have extensive neuropathologic and aberrant behaviors. The observation that patients with fetal alcohol syndrome share similar features to patients with CRASH has lead to the investigation of the effects of ethanol on L1. Physiologic concentrations of ethanol have been shown to inhibit L1 mediated neurite outgrowth in cerebellar granule neurons. Such inhibition may result from decreased expression, altered cell surface distribution, impaired signal transduction, or impaired interaction with the cytoskeleton. These data indicate that L1 and its associated signaling pathways are potentially targets for developmental neurotoxicants.

