
Recently, we have described a COOH-terminal deletion mutation of the human insulin receptor (HIR delta CT) that exhibits normal insulin-mediated kinase activity and endocytosis, but is inefficient in stimulating glucose transport and glycogen synthase (McClain, D. A., Maegawa, H., Levy, J., Huecksteadt, T., Dull, T. J., Lee, J., Ullrich, A., and Olefsky, J.M. (1988) J. Biol. Chem. 263, 8904-8911; Maegawa, H., McClain, D. A., Freidenberg, G., Olefsky, J. M., Napier, M., Lipari, T., Dull, T. J., Lee, J., and Ullrich, A. (1988) J. Biol. Chem. 263, 8912-8917). In this paper, we report that despite this defect in metabolic signaling, the truncated receptor exhibits augmented mitogenic activity compared to normal receptors. These results were verified in three independently isolated clones of Rat 1 fibroblasts transfected with the HIR delta CT cDNA. The increase in insulin sensitivity of mitogenic stimulation was proportional to the number of HIR delta CT receptors expressed on the cells. By contrast, only the cells with normal receptors and none of the HIR delta CT clones exhibit increased sensitivity for a metabolic action of insulin, the stimulation of glucose uptake. Stimulation of cells by other mitogens and autoradiographic analysis confirm that the enhanced mitogenic effects seen in HIR delta CT cells are attributable only to the presence of the truncated insulin receptors. These receptors mediate the tyrosine phosphorylation of a number of cellular proteins, and the pattern of these phosphorylations differs quantitatively from that seen in cells with normal receptors. We conclude: 1) The COOH terminus plays a role in signaling metabolic actions of insulin, perhaps through its recognition of substrates for the receptor kinase. 2) By contrast, the COOH terminus is an inhibitory regulator of mitogenesis, and removal of the terminal 43 amino acids converts the receptor from a moderately active growth signaler to a very active one. 3) The changes seen in biologic activities of the HIR delta CT receptor are associated with quantitative changes in substrate phosphorylation by the receptor kinase.

