
Evidence is presented that distinct cellular signal transduction pathways involving cAMP-dependent protein kinase-A and phorbol ester-stimulated protein kinase-C coordinately modulate gene transcription through common as well as distinct cis-acting elements and DNA-binding proteins. When transfected and expressed in HeLa and placental JEG-3 cells, fusion reporter plasmids that differ only by a single base deletion or addition to interconvert the octameric cAMP-responsive element TGACGTCA (CRE) to form the heptameric phorbol ester-responsive element TGACTCA (TRE) are differentially regulated by cAMP and phorbol esters [12-O-tetradecanoyl phorbol-14-acetate (TPA)]. Transcription directed by the CRE is stimulated by cAMP and not TPA, although the basal expression mediated by this element in JEG-3 and HeLa cells is augmented by endogenous protein kinase-C activity. In contrast, TRE mediates transcriptional responses to both cAMP and TPA, and the two agents together give synergistic responses. Inhibition of cAMP-dependent protein kinase-A by expression of a minigene encoding a peptide inhibitor of A-kinase abolishes the response of TRE to cAMP alone as well as the cAMP-induced component of the synergistic response to treatment with both TPA and cAMP. Desensitization of the protein kinase-C dependent pathway by prolonged exposure of cells to phorbol esters eliminates the TPA-induced transcription by TRE and inhibits the TPA-induced component of the synergistic response to both cAMP and TPA. Therefore, both protein kinases, A and C, are involved in transcriptional activation by the TRE; the function of either kinase alone results in a moderate level of activity, but the combined results of both functionally stimulated kinases are synergistically positive. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays using whole extracts of JEG-3 cells indicate that a common factor(s) binds both TRE and CRE; however, another factor(s) that binds to the CRE will not bind to the TRE. Further, a latent regulatory enhancer element (URE) located upstream of the CRE's in the human alpha gonadotropin gene, although inactive when paired alone with the alpha 100 promoter, induces basal and stimulated transcriptional activity of both CRE and TRE on the average of 10- to 20-fold. The data support the existence of a gene regulatory network consisting of related cis-acting elements and DNA-binding proteins whose transcriptional activities are regulated by the convergent actions of protein kinases-C and -A.

