
From the studies presented above, it is obvious that fatty acylation is a common modification among proteins involved in cellular regulatory pathways, and in certain cases mutational analyses have demonstrated the importance of covalent fatty acids in the functioning of these proteins. Indeed, certain properties provided by fatty acylation make it an attractive modification for regulatory proteins that might interact with many different substrates, particularly those found at or near the plasma membrane/cytosol interface. In the case of intracellular fatty acylated proteins, the fatty acyl moiety allows tight binding to the plasma membrane without the need for cotranslational insertion through the bilayer. For example, consider the tight, salt-resistant interaction of myristoylated SRC with the membrane, whereas its nonmyristoylated counterpart is completely soluble. Likewise for the RAS proteins, which associate weakly with the membrane in the absence of fatty acylation, while palmitoylation increases their affinity for the plasma membrane and their biological activity. Fatty acylation also permits reversible membrane association in some cases, particularly for several myristoylated proteins, thus conferring plasticity on their interactions with various signaling pathway components. Finally, although this has not been demonstrated, it is conceivable that covalent fatty acid may allow for rapid mobility of proteins within the membrane. Several questions remain to be answered concerning requirements for fatty acylation by regulatory proteins. The identity of the putative SRC "receptor" will provide important clues as to the pathways in which normal SRC functions, as well as into the process of transformation by oncogenic tyrosine kinases. The possibility that other fatty acylated proteins associate with the plasma membrane in an analogous manner also needs to be investigated. An intriguing observation that can be made from the information presented here is that at least three different families of proteins involved in growth factor signaling pathways encode both acylated and nonacylated members, suggesting that selective fatty acylation may provide a means of determining the specificity of their interactions with other regulatory molecules. Further studies of fatty acylated proteins should yield important information concerning the regulation of intracellular signaling pathways utilized during growth and differentiation.

