
Orteronel (TAK-700) is an investigational, non-steroidal inhibitor of CYP17A1 with preferential inhibition of 17,20-lyase in NCI-H295 cells. Estrogen is synthesized from androgen by aromatase activity, and the effect of orteronel on estrogen synthesis was therefore evaluated. First, it was confirmed that orteronel does not directly inhibit aromatase activity. Second, the specific decline of serum estradiol and androgen levels in hypophysectomized female rats by orteronel in comparison with aromatase inhibitor anastrozole was evaluated; orteronel at doses ≥3mg/kg significantly suppressed serum estradiol, testosterone, androstenedione and 17-hydroxyprogesterone levels, and increased progesterone levels in the estrogen-synthesis pathway. Orteronel, at a dose of 300mg/kg, suppressed serum estradiol concentrations to a similar degree as 0.1mg/kg anastrozole. In contrast, in the corticoid-synthesis pathway, serum aldosterone, corticosterone, and progesterone levels did not change significantly following administration of 300mg/kg of orteronel. Third, the effect of multiple oral administration of orteronel on serum estradiol levels in regularly cycling female cynomolgus monkeys was evaluated. Orteronel at 15mg/kg/day (7.5mg/kg/treatment, twice daily [bid]) continued to suppress the estradiol surge prior to the start of luteal phase for 1.5-times the average duration of three consecutive, pre-treatment menstrual cycles, while serum progesterone was maintained at levels almost equal to those in the luteal phase although a certain portion of this increased level of progesterone could be of adrenal-origin. This suppressive effect on estradiol surge was thought to be reversible since serum estradiol levels started to rise immediately after the discontinuation of orteronel. Estradiol surge was not abrogated by treatment with anastrozole 0.2mg/kg/day (0.1mg/kg/treatment, bid). In summary, orteronel can suppress serum estradiol concentrations in hypophysectomized female rats and monkeys through selective inhibition of CYP17A1 activity, suggesting that orteronel might be effective for hormone-dependent breast cancers and estrogen-dependent diseases. 

