
Advanced oxidation protein products (AOPPs), a marker of oxidative stress, are prevalent in many kinds of disorders. Rheumatoid arthritis (RA), mainly resulting from the dysfunction of fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLSs), is related to oxidative stress. Although the increased levels of AOPPs in RA patients were reported, the effect of AOPPs on FLSs function still remains unclear. Therefore, our study aims to investigate whether AOPPs have an effect on the inflammatory response of FLSs in vitro.

FLSs obtained from both knees of rats were treated with or without AOPPs-modified rat serum albumin (AOPPs-RSA) in vitro. The mRNA and protein expression of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, interleukin(IL)-1β, matrix metalloproteinases(MMP)-3, MMP-13 and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) were measured by real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), respectively. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation was detected by fluorescent microscope and fluorescence microplate reader. Immunoprecipitation, Co-Immunoprecipitation and western blot were performed to examine the activity of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase and nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB).

Exposure of FLSs to AOPPs upregulated the mRNA and protein expression of TNF-α, IL-1β, MMP-3, MMP-13 and VEGF in a concentration dependent manner. AOPPs treatment triggered ROS production in FLSs, which was significantly abolished by ROS scavenger N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC), superoxide dismutase (SOD), NADPH oxidase inhibitors diphenyleneiodonium (DPI) and apocynin. Challenged AOPPs induced phosphorylation of p47(phox), triggered an interaction between p47(phox), p22(phox) and gp91(phox), and significantly upregulated expression of NADPH oxidase subunits p47(phox), p22(phox) and gp91(phox). IκB degradation and nuclear translocation of NF-κB p65 induced by AOPPs were significantly blocked by SOD, NAC, DPI and apocynin.

These data indicate that AOPPs induce inflammatory response in FLSs is medicated through NADPH oxidase-dependent activation of NF-κB.

