
In this work, four cDNA clones (Pd-ACS1,AJ890088; Pd-ETR1 and Pd-ERS1, AJ890092, AJ890091; and Pd-CTR1, AJ890089) encoding an ACC-synthase, two putative ethylene (ET) receptors, and a putative MAPKKK, respectively, were isolated and phylogenetically characterized in Prunus domestica L. subsp. insititia. Their expression was studied by real-time PCR during flower (closed, open and senescent) and fruit (early green, late green, maturation and ripening) development of damson plum, which is climateric. While two peaks of ET production were quantified at early green and ripening stages in whole fruits, the seed was not able to produce it during maturation and ripening stages. All studied genes were differentially expressed during flower and fruit development. In general, the level of transcripts of Pd-ACS1 was higher in fruits than in flowers. However, it was noteworthy that: (1) Pd-ACS1 expression was hardly detected in closed flowers and at low levels during early green stage; and fruit development provoked a notable differential expression in seeds, and pericarp; (2) the results of Pd-ACS1 expression during fruit development suggest a preponderant role of this gene from late green stage onward. The stamen was the only floral organ in which expression of both Pd-ETR1 and Pd-ERS1 receptor genes was not significantly altered during development; however, their expression decreased concomitantly with development of pistil (only floral organ to register a net ET production when fertilized) and during first days of ovary development (the highest ET production during all fruit development). Contrary to Pd-ERS1, the level of Pd-ETR1 mRNA was temporally quite similar in the seed. With regard Pd-ETR1, even its expression was very scarce during maturation of mesocarp, was stimulated during ripening. In the epicarp, Pd-ERS1 and Pd-ETR1 were low expressed during pit hardening increasing onward and decreasing during ripening. Pd-CTR1 expression was in the seed>mesocarp>>epicarp. Spatial and temporal levels of Pd-ACS1, Pd-ETR1, Pd-ERS1 and Pd-CTR1 mRNAs described in this work demonstrate that the expression of these genes is not always constitutive and that control of its transcription may play an important role in regulating the development of reproductive organs of damson plum.

