
Emerging new research suggests that the functions of the angiotensin (Ang) II type 1 (AT(1)) receptor are regulated in a complex manner. AT(1) receptor-associated protein (ATRAP) has been reported to reduce AT(1) receptor signaling with enhancement of AT(1) receptor internalization and to regulate the calcineurin/nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) pathway. We examined the possibility that ATRAP could attenuate AT(1) receptor-mediated vascular senescence via inactivation with the calcineurin/NFAT pathway. Ang II stimulation significantly increased senescence-associated beta-galactosidase (SA-beta-gal)-stained cells, oxidative stress, and expression of p53 and p21 in wild-type (WT) vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC). Moreover, in WT VSMC, Ang II stimulation enhanced NFAT transcriptional activity, which was prevented by CAML-siRNA treatment. NFAT-siRNA treatment attenuated Ang-II-increased SA-beta-gal activity and p53 and p21 expression. Treatment with a calcineurin activity inhibitor, cyclosporin A, reduced Ang-II-induced NFAT transcriptional activity and senescent VSMC. In contrast, VSMC prepared from ATRAP transgenic (ATRAP-Tg) mice exhibited attenuation of Ang-II-induced SA-beta-gal activity, oxidative stress, NFAT transcriptional activity, and expression of p53 and p21. Moreover, ATRAP-Tg VSMC showed a more reduction of Ang-II-induced NFAT transcriptional activity by CAML-siRNA treatment than WT VSMC. Furthermore, we demonstrated that in ATRAP-Tg VSMC, NFAT activity and senescent cells induced by ultraviolet irradiation were decreased compared with those in WT VSMC. Treatment with an AT(1) receptor blocker, valsartan, blocked these senescent cells but did not change NFAT activity in both cells. These results suggest that ATRAP negatively regulates VSMC senescence by reducing AT(1) receptor signaling, and that ATRAP-mediated inactivation of the calcineurin/NFAT pathway could be at least partly involved in prevention of VSMC senescence, irrespective of AT(1) receptor blockade in some conditions.

