
Oxidative stresses caused by reactive oxygen species (ROS) can induce rapid depolarization of inner mitochondrial membrane potential and subsequent impairment of oxidative phosphorylation. Damaged mitochondria produce more ROS, especially the superoxide anion (O(2)(-)) and hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)), which potentiate mitochondria-driven ROS propagation, so-called ROS-induced ROS release (RIRR), via activation of an inter-mitochondria signaling network. Therefore, loss of function in only a fraction of mitochondria might eventually affect cell viability through this positive feedback loop. Since ROS are very short-lived molecules in the biological milieu, mitochondrial network dynamics, such as density, number, and spatial distribution, can affect mitochondria-driven ROS propagation. To address this issue, we developed a mathematical model using an agent-based modeling approach, and tested the effect of mitochondrial network dynamics on RIRR for mitochondria under various conditions. Simulation results show that the intracellular ROS signaling pattern, such as ROS propagation speed and oxidative stress vulnerability, are critically affected by mitochondrial network dynamics. Mitochondrial network dynamics of mitochondrial distribution, density, activity, and size can mediate inter-mitochondrial signaling under certain conditions and determine the identity of the ROS signaling pattern. We further elucidated the potential mechanism of these actions, i.e., conversion of major messenger molecules involved in ROS signaling. If the average distance between neighboring mitochondria is large or mitochondrial distribution becomes randomized, messenger molecule of the ROS signaling network can be switched from O(2)(-) to H(2)O(2). In this case, mitochondria-driven ROS propagation is efficiently blocked by introduction of excess cytosolic glutathione peroxidase 1, while introduction of cytosolic superoxide dismutase has no effect. Together, these results suggest that mitochondrial network dynamics is a major determinant for cellular responses to RIRR through changing the key messenger molecules.

