
Reproductive hormones are associated with risk for epithelial ovarian cancer. To determine the effect of such hormones on the activation of interleukin 6 (IL-6)/STAT3 (signal transducer and activator of transcription-3) signaling, which may be involved in ovarian cancer, we investigated the status of STAT3, IL-6, and its receptor in immortalized human ovarian surface epithelial (HOSE) and ovarian cancer (OVCA) cell lines.

Two immortalized HOSE cell lines and two OVCA cell lines were cultured with gonadotropins, sex steroid hormones, and/or IL-6, alone or with specific inhibitors or IL-6-neutralizing antibodies. Expression of IL-6, the IL-6 receptor alpha chain (IL-6Ralpha), and phosphorylated and unphosphorylated STAT3 messenger RNAs (mRNAs) and proteins in all cells was determined. Cell proliferation and soft-agar colony formation were assessed. STAT3 activity was investigated in OVCA cells transfected with a dominant negative STAT3 (Dn-STAT3), wild-type STAT3, or an empty control vector. All statistical tests were two-sided.

Levels of IL-6 mRNA and protein increased in all cells treated with follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), 17beta-estradiol, or estrone but increased only in OVCA cells treated with testosterone and 5alpha-dihydrotestosterone. For all lines, IL-6 antibodies partially inhibited hormone-stimulated cell proliferation but completely inhibited IL-6-enhanced cell proliferation. IL-6 induced STAT3 phosphorylation and activation in HOSE cells; STAT3 was constitutively activated in OVCA cells. Higher levels of IL-6Ralpha and STAT3 transcription factors were observed in OVCA cells than in HOSE cells. After transfection, Dn-STAT3 suppressed endogenous STAT3 and inhibited all forms of IL-6-stimulated OVCA cell proliferation (OVCA 429 cells, P<.001; OVCA 432 cells, P<.006), whereas wild-type STAT3 enhanced HOSE cell proliferation (wild-type STAT3 at 0.5 microg/mL in HOSE 306 cells, P<.002; STAT3 at 1.0 microg/mL in HOSE 306 or both concentrations of wild-type STAT3 in HOSE 642 cells, P<.001).

The IL-6/STAT3 signaling pathway may mediate FSH-, LH-, and estrogen-stimulated HOSE cell proliferation. Increased IL-6Ralpha expression and constitutive STAT3 activation may be associated with ovarian cancer.

