
Nitric oxide (NO) is a free radical that is important in retinal signal transduction and cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) is a critical downstream messenger of NO. The NO/cGMP signaling pathway has been shown to modulate neurotransmitter release and gap junction coupling in horizontal cells and amacrine cells, and increase the gain of the light response in photoreceptors. However, many of the mechanisms controlling the production of NO and cGMP remain unclear. Previous studies have shown activation of NO/cGMP production in response to stimulation with N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) or nicotine, and the differential modulation of cGMP production by GABA(A) and GABA(C) receptors (GABA(A)Rs and GABA(C)Rs). This study used cGMP immunocytochemistry and NO imaging to investigate how the inhibitory GABAergic and glycinergic systems modulate the production of NO and cGMP. Our data show that blocking glycine receptors (GLYR) with strychnine (STRY) produced moderate increases in cGMP-like immunoreactivity (cGMP-LI) in select types of amacrine and bipolar cells, and strong increases in NO-induced fluorescence (NO-IF). TPMPA, a selective GABACR antagonist, greatly reduced the increases in cGMP-LI stimulated by STRY, but did not influence the increase in NO-IF stimulated by STRY. Bicuculline (BIC), a GABA(A)R antagonist, however, enhanced the increases in both the cGMP-LI and NO-IF stimulated by STRY. CNQX, a selective antagonist for alpha-Amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazoleproprionic acid hydrobromide/kainic acid (AMPA/KA) receptors, eliminated both the increases in cGMP-LI and NO-IF stimulated by STRY, while MK801, a selective antagonist for NMDA receptors, slightly increased the cGMP-LI and slightly decreased the NO-IF stimulated by STRY. Finally, double labeling of NO-stimulated cGMP and either GLY or GABA indicated that cGMP predominantly colocalized with GLY. Taken together, these findings support the hypothesis that GLY and GABA interact in the regulation of the NO/cGMP signaling pathway, where GLY primarily inhibits NO production and GABA has a greater effect on cGMP production. Such interacting inhibitory pathways could shape the course of signal transduction of the NO/cGMP pathway under different physiological situations.

