
Progesterone (P(4)) is a physiological inducer of the acrosome reaction (AR) in stallion spermatozoa. However, the capacitation-dependent changes that enable progesterone binding, and the nature of the signaling cascade that is triggered by progesterone and results in induction of the AR, are poorly understood. The aim of the current study was, therefore, to investigate the protein kinase dependent signaling cascades involved in progesterone-mediated induction of the AR in stallion spermatozoa. In addition, we aimed to determine whether bicarbonate, an inducer of sperm capacitation, acted via the same pathway as P(4) or whether it otherwise synergized P(4)-mediated induction of the AR. We examined the effect on AR progression of specific inhibitors and stimulators of protein kinase A (PKA), protein kinase C (PKC), protein kinase G (PKG), and protein tyrosine kinase (PTK), in the presence or absence of 15 mM bicarbonate and/or 1 microg/ml progesterone. Progression of the AR was assessed using the Pisum sativum agglutinin conjugated to fluorescein iso thiocyanate (PSA-FITC) staining technique. Bicarbonate specifically activated a PKA-dependent signaling pathway, whereas the effect of P(4) was independent of PKA. Conversely, while P(4)-mediated AR induction was dependent on PTK, the effects of bicarbonate were PTK-independent. Finally, although the AR inducing effects of both P(4) and bicarbonate were sensitive to staurosporin, a potent blocker of PKC activity at moderate (50 nM) concentrations, the effect of P(4) was completely blocked at 50 nM staurosporin, whereas that of bicarbonate was only completely inhibited by much higher concentrations (2 microM) where staurosporin also inhibits PKA activity. In conclusion, P(4)-mediated activation of the AR is dependent on a pathway that includes both PTK and PKC. While the effects of bicarbonate on the AR are mediated via a separate PKA-dependent signaling pathway, P(4) and bicarbonate have synergistic effects on the AR.

