
Various stimuli, such as ischemia/hypoxia enhance newborn cell survival in the subventricular zone and their migration tangentially in chains toward the olfactory bulb. The present study assessed the fate of newborn neurons from subventricular zone to olfactory bulb under conditions of chronic cerebral hypoperfusion, and examined the role of cAMP-responsive element binding protein signaling on the survival of these neurons by using cilostazol, a potent inhibitor of type III phosphodiesterase. Rats underwent bilateral common carotid artery ligation. They were divided into sham-operated (n=70), vehicle- (n=70), and type III phosphodiesterase inhibitor-treated (n=70) groups. Immunohistochemically-stained section for 5-bromodeoxyuridine and a series of neuronal and glial markers were analyzed at days 7, 14, 21 and 28 after hypoperfusion. The reduction of olfactory bulb size gradually progressed in the vehicle group (P<0.05), but not in the sham-operated and type III phosphodiesterase inhibitor-treated group. The subventricular zone of the vehicle-treated rats contained significantly larger numbers of newborn neuroblasts after hypoperfusion, compared with sham-operated rats (P<0.05), but significantly lower numbers in the rostral migratory stream and olfactory bulb (P<0.05). Treatment of rats with type III phosphodiesterase inhibitor increased the number of neuroblasts and enhanced the survival and differentiation of cells (P<0.05). Phosphorylated cAMP-responsive element binding protein within neuroblasts was markedly decreased in the subventricular zone, rostral migratory stream, and olfactory bulb of vehicle-treated rats (P<0.05), but treatment with type III phosphodiesterase inhibitor resulted in recovery of this expression throughout hypoperfusion, leading to enhanced neurogenesis (P<0.05). These effects were abrogated by protein kinase A and C inhibitor. Our results indicated that cAMP-responsive element binding protein signaling is a key mediator of neurogenesis after prolonged hypoperfusion and provide the basis for new regenerative therapies for ischemic brain injury.

