
Ghrelin, a 28 amino acid, octanoylated peptide, is an endogenous ligand for the growth hormone secretagogue receptor (GHS-R). In addition to various endocrine functions, including stimulation of GH release, ghrelin has been characterized as an important regulator of energy homeostasis. Ghrelin administration has been shown to increase adiposity in rodents and stimulate food intake in humans. Studies suggest that these orexigenic effects are mediated primarily through GHS-R expression in hypothalamic and pituitary neuronal pathways. In this context, GHS-R has been recognized as a potential target for the treatment of GH deficiency and body weight disorders. Cell lines provide convenient in vitro systems to identify and characterize potential pharmacophores and to analyze GHS-R functional activity. While recombinant cell lines that overexpress GHS-R have served as effective research tools for these studies, such cell lines may differ in signaling response to ghrelin compared with hypothalamic or pituitary cells expressing GHS-R. We show here that a cell line derived from a rat anterior pituitary adenoma, RC-4B/C, expresses endogenous GHS-R as judged by reverse transcriptase-PCR. In a Ca(2+)mobilization assay, RC-4B/C cells demonstrate a dose-dependent increase in intracellular [Ca(2+)] on stimulation with rat ghrelin and a related peptide agonist, hexarelin (EC(50), 1.0 nM and 1.7 nM respectively), but are unresponsive to treatment with inactive des-octanoyl rat ghrelin. A subclone, RC-4B/C.40, with a more robust and stable ghrelin response, was isolated from the parental population of cells to allow further analysis of GHS-R signal transduction. Using pertussis toxin and the phospholipase C inhibitor U-73122, we show that ghrelin signals through the Gq pathway in the RC-4B/C.40 cells. We also demonstrate that the ghrelin-induced rise of intracellular [Ca(2+)] in RC-4B/C.40 cells involves initial Ca(2+)release from intracellular stores followed by a sustained elevation that occurs via influx of extracellular Ca(2+) through ion channels. In addition, unlike observations reported in recombinant cell systems, the RC-4B/C.40 cells do not exhibit a high level of GHS-R constitutive activity as determined in a phosphatidylinositol hydrolysis assay. Overall, the data presented here suggest that the RC-4B/C parental and RC-4B/C.40 cells provide novel in vitro systems for the characterization of GHS-R pharmacophores and ghrelin signaling.

