
The ErbB family of receptor tyrosine kinases regulates cell growth, differentiation and survival. Activation of the receptors is induced by specific growth factors in an autocrine, paracrine or juxtacrine manner. The activated ErbB receptors turn on a large variety of signaling cascades, including the prominent Ras-dependent signaling pathways. The activated Ras can induce secretion of growth factors such as EGF and neuregulin, which activate their respective receptors. In the present study, we demonstrate for the first time that activated Ras can activate ErbB4 receptor in a ligand-independent manner. Expression of constitutively active H-Ras(12V), K-Ras(12V) or N-Ras(13V) in PC12-ErbB4 cells induced ErbB4-receptor phosphorylation, indicating that each of the most abundant Ras isoforms can induce receptor activation. NRG-induced phosphorylation of ErbB4 receptor was blocked by the soluble ErbB4 receptor, which had no effect on the Ras-induced receptor phosphorylation. Moreover, conditioned medium from H-Ras(12V)-transfected PC12-ErbB4 cells had no effect on receptor phosphorylation. It thus indicates that Ras induces ErbB4 phosphorylation in a ligand-independent manner. Each of the Ras effector domain mutants, H-Ras(12V)S35, H-Ras(12V)C40, and H-Ras(12V)G37, which respectively activate Raf1, PI3K, and RalGEF, induced a small but significant receptor phosphorylation. The PI3K inhibitor LY294002 and the MEK inhibitor PD98059 caused a partial inhibition of the Ras-induced ErbB4 receptor phosphorylation. Using a mutant ErbB4 receptor, which lacks kinase activity, we demonstrated that the Ras-mediated ErbB4 phosphorylation depends on the kinase activity of the receptor and facilitates ligand-independent neurite outgrowth in PC12-ErbB4 cells. These experiments demonstrate a novel mechanism controlling ErbB receptor activation. Ras induces ErbB4 receptor phosphorylation in a non-autocrine manner and this activation depends on multiple Ras effector pathways and on ErbB4 kinase activity.

