
Prostate cancer cells rely on androgen receptor (AR) for proliferation and survival. Therefore, curing prostate cancer will require elimination of AR. Although androgen is the natural ligand that activates AR, AR activity is also subject to regulation by growth factor/growth factor receptor-stimulated signaling pathways that control the cell cycle. Cell cycle regulatory proteins and protein kinases in signaling pathways affected by growth factors can lead to AR activation in the absence of androgen. While downstream signaling proteins such as cyclins, cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs), and pRB can modulate AR activity, upstream signaling pathways involving protein kinases such as mitogen-activated protein kinases, protein kinase A, and protein kinase B/Akt can affect post-translational modification of AR to affect not only AR function but also AR stability. Calcium and calmodulin (CaM), essential for proliferation and viability of a number of cells, including prostate cancer cells, play an important role in AR expression, stability, and function. CaM affects AR partly by interacting directly with AR and partly by activating protein kinases such as Akt and DNA-PK that can phosphorylate AR. The ubiquitin/26S proteasome pathway responsible for timely destruction of cell cycle regulatory proteins whose levels impede cell cycle progression also induces AR expression by activating NF-kappaB, and promotes AR activity by participating in the assembly of an AR transcription complex. Maspin, a serine protease inhibitor that is known mostly for its role as a tumor suppressor can also regulate AR intracellular localization and function by competing with AR for binding to the chaperone protein Hsp90 and co-repressor HDAC1, respectively. This perspective reviews the experimental evidence implicating these diverse cellular processes in AR expression, stability, and/or function, and presents a rationale for disrupting these cellular processes as a viable option for the treatment of both the hormone-sensitive and the hormone-insensitive prostate cancer.

