
Retinogenesis is a developmental process that involves the sequential formation of neurons and glia from retinal progenitors. Once retinogenesis is completed, Müller glial cells can be stimulated to differentiate into neuronal lineages and constitute a retina-intrinsic source of neural progenitors. The identification of the intrinsic and extrinsic factors that control proliferation and differentiation of Müller cells or retinal progenitors is needed in order to fully define their potential therapeutic use in regenerative approaches. Here we determined the response of retinal progenitors derived from Müller glia primary cell cultures to GABA-activated signal transduction cascades. Using Western blot analysis, immunocytochemistry and calcium imaging we found that GABA induces an increase of the number of progenitor cells that present spontaneous intracellular calcium transients as well as their frequency, which involve the participation of L-type voltage-gated calcium channels (VGCCs). This process correlates with the activation of transcription factor CREB through Ser33 phosphorylation and the induction of expression of the early neuronal markers NeuroD1 and βIII-tubulin. GABA-mediated CREB phosphorylation was rapid and sustained and the pharmacological blockade of CREB activity inhibited the effect of GABA on NeuroD1 expression. Furthermore, consistent with the role of CREB as a histone acetyltransferase recruiter, we demonstrate that GABA induces the modification of histone H4 acetylation pattern in these cells suggesting that epigenetic alterations participate in the differentiation process. Our results support the notion that postnatal retinal progenitors derived from Müller glia primary cell cultures respond to GABA through the same molecular pathway previously characterized in hippocampal progenitors and developing neurons. We speculate that the induction of GABA receptor signaling could represent a novel strategy to enhance neural versus glial specification from these cells through genetic and epigenetic mechanisms.

