
The present studies were undertaken to determine whether the interaction between cAMP-dependent and insulin-dependent pathways in primary cultures of rat hepatocytes affects biological functions and tyrosine phosphorylation. Quiescent hepatocytes were pretreated with dibutyryl cAMP or cAMP-generating agents such as glucagon, and then treated or not with insulin. Preincubation for 6 h with dibutyryl cAMP or glucagon enhanced the effect of insulin on DNA synthesis, but not the effect of insulin on amino acid transport or glycogen and protein synthesis. Tyrosine phosphorylation of intracellular proteins was determined by immunoblot analysis using an anti-phosphotyrosine antibody. Maximum tyrosine phosphorylation of a 195 kDa protein, which may be a substrate of insulin receptor kinase, of 175-180 kDa proteins, including insulin receptor substrate (IRS)-1, and of 90-95 kDa proteins, including the insulin receptor beta-subunit, was reached within 30 s of incubation with insulin. Pretreatment for about 3 h with dibutyryl cAMP or cAMP-generating agents clearly increased insulin-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation of the 195 kDa protein, but not IRS-1, IRS-2 or the insulin receptor beta-subunit. Because dibutyryl cAMP and cAMP-generating agents did not increase insulin receptor number or its kinase activity, the effect of cAMP on this potentiation of tyrosine phosphorylation is assumed to be exerted at a step distal to insulin receptor kinase activation. The potentiation by cAMP pretreatment of insulin-stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation may in part be secondary to inhibition of phosphotyrosine phosphatase activity, because cAMP pretreatment blunted the effect of Na3VO4 on the net tyrosine phosphorylation of the 195 kDa protein as compared with cells pretreated with no additive. In summary, the interactions between cAMP-dependent and insulin-dependent pathways that lead to augmentation of DNA synthesis appear to parallel the changes in tyrosine phosphorylation. Further studies will be required to determine whether there is a causal relationship between these phenomena.

