
Starvation-induced development of Myxococcus xanthus is an excellent model for biofilm formation because it involves cell-cell signaling to coordinate formation of multicellular mounds, gene expression, and cellular differentiation into spores. The role of sigma(D), an alternative sigma factor important for viability in stationary phase and for stress responses, was investigated during development by measuring signal production, gene expression, and sporulation of a sigD null mutant alone and upon codevelopment with wild-type cells or signaling mutants. The sigD mutant responded to starvation by inducing (p)ppGpp synthesis normally but was impaired for production of A-signal, an early cell density signal, and for production of the morphogenetic C-signal. Induction of early developmental genes was greatly reduced, and expression of those that depend on A-signal was not restored by codevelopment with wild-type cells, indicating that sigma(D) is needed for cellular responses to A-signal. Despite these early developmental defects, the sigD mutant responded to C-signal supplied by codeveloping wild-type cells by inducing a subset of late developmental genes. sigma(D) RNA polymerase is dispensable for transcription of this subset, but a distinct regulatory class, which includes genes essential for sporulation, requires sigma(D) RNA polymerase or a gene under its control, cell autonomously. The level of sigD transcript in a relA mutant during growth is much lower than in wild-type cells, suggesting that (p)ppGpp positively regulates sigD transcription in growing cells. The sigD transcript level drops in wild-type cells after 20 min of starvation and remains low after 40 min but rises in a relA mutant after 40 min, suggesting that (p)ppGpp negatively regulates sigD transcription early in development. We conclude that sigma(D) synthesized during growth occupies a position near the top of a regulatory hierarchy governing M. xanthus development, analogous to sigma factors that control biofilm formation of other bacteria.

