
prolonged P2Y-receptor signalling can cause vasoconstriction leading to hypertension, vascular smooth muscle hypertrophy, and hyperplasia. G protein-coupled receptor signalling is negatively regulated by G protein-coupled receptor kinases (GRKs) and arrestin proteins, preventing prolonged or inappropriate signalling. This study investigates whether GRKs and arrestins regulate uridine 5'-triphosphate (UTP)-stimulated contractile signalling in adult Wistar rat mesenteric arterial smooth muscle cells (MSMCs).

mesenteric arteries contracted in response to UTP challenge: When an EC(50) UTP concentration (30 µM, 5 min) was added 5 min before (R(1)) and after (R(2)) the addition of a maximal UTP concentration (R(max): 100 µM, 5 min), R(2) responses were decreased relative to R(1), indicating desensitization. UTP-induced P2Y-receptor desensitization of phospholipase C signalling was studied in isolated MSMCs transfected with an inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate biosensor and/or loaded with Ca(2+)-sensitive dyes. A similar protocol (R(1)/R(2) = 10 µM; R(max) = 100 µM, applied for 30 s) revealed markedly reduced R(2) when compared with R(1) responses. MSMCs were transfected with dominant-negative GRKs or siRNAs targeting specific GRK/arrestins to probe their respective roles in P2Y-receptor desensitization. GRK2 inhibition, but not GRK3, GRK5, or GRK6, attenuated P2Y-receptor desensitization. siRNA-mediated knockdown of arrestin2 attenuated UTP-stimulated P2Y-receptor desensitization, whereas arrestin3 depletion did not. Specific siRNA knockdown of the P2Y(2)-receptor almost completely abolished UTP-stimulated IP(3)/Ca(2+) signalling, strongly suggesting that our study is specifically characterizing this purinoceptor subtype.

these new data highlight roles of GRK2 and arrestin2 as important regulators of UTP-stimulated P2Y(2)-receptor responsiveness in resistance arteries, emphasizing their potential importance in regulating vasoconstrictor signalling pathways implicated in vascular disease.

