
A model for the evolution of hormone-independent tumors from a pregnancy-dependent precursor is exemplified by the TPDMT-4[pregnancy-dependent (PD)] and T4OI96 [ovarian-independent (OI)] in vivo tumor lines developed in DDD mice. In vivo, the OI tumor grows rapidly in virgin mice and is more anaplastic than the PD tumor which, in virgin mice, grows as a hyperplastic alveolar gland from which tumors arise only during pregnancy. The regulation of the proliferation of these two tumors was compared in primary culture using a three-dimensional, serum-free, collagen gel cell culture system. In medium containing insulin, the growth of cell organoids from PD tumors was stimulated by the same factors that stimulate the growth of normal mammary epithelial cells from virgin or pregnant mice. These factors include progesterone and prolactin (but not estrogen), epidermal growth factor, basic fibroblast growth factor, linoleic acid, cyclic AMP, prostaglandin E2, phosphatidic acid, and lithium. Most of these tumors (about 80%) could not grow in medium with only insulin present; of those that did, growth was slow and was stimulated further by the above agents. PD tumor cells formed stellate colonies in the collagen matrix similar to those of normal cells. These findings show that the growth regulation of PD tumor cells is, in all aspects examined, similar to that of normal cells. In addition, the capacity for growth in the presence of only insulin (more autonomous growth) is not necessarily accompanied by deletions in responses to growth factors or hormones, or in lipid response pathways. In contrast, organoids from OI tumors needed only insulin for growth. The growth of some of these tumors was stimulated further by only basic fibroblast growth factor and phosphatidic acid. Cyclic AMP and agents that elevate intracellular cyclic AMP inhibited growth, the opposite of the response seen in normal or PD cells. OI organoids grew as cell masses rather than as stellate structures. These data show that while PD tumors are remarkably similar to normal cells in the regulation of their proliferation, OI tumors have incurred multiple defects in growth-regulatory pathways possibly including the production of autocrine growth factor(s). In addition, the ability of OI tumor cells to adhere to the collagen gel matrix and undergo normal morphogenesis is reduced. These results may highlight specific events required for the progression from ovarian dependency to ovarian independency related to the hormonal regulation of growth.

