
The stratum corneum of vertebrates is a major structural compartment that provides mechanical protection and prevents skin desiccation. The water barrier function of the stratum corneum was first reported in 1944, and this was shown later to be associated with multilayered lipid lamellae localized in the extracellular spaces. The major lipid components isolated from the cornified epidermal layers are ceramides, which belong to the class of sphingolipids, cholesterol and free fatty acids; their biosynthesis is in tight relationship with the cutaneous barrier function. In studies in which the barrier is artificially disturbed, lipid biosynthesis is found to be directly regulated by barrier permeability. As mentioned above, the ceramides involved in this process are located in the extracellular spaces of the upper epidermal layers, whereas sphingomyelin, the most common sphingolipid, is an integral part of the bilayer plasma membrane of the keratinocytes. During the last few years, however, increasing evidence has shown that sphingolipids may also take part in cell signalling, and the term 'sphingomyelin cycle' has been coined to describe this novel path-way of signal transduction. Intracellular messengers of the sphingomyelin cycle are ceramides as the products of an agonist-stimulated sphingomyelin hydrolysis. Increased levels of intracellular ceramides induce cell differentiation and/or apoptosis and reduce cell proliferation. In contrast to the extracellular barrier-forming ceramides which are complex partly O-acylated species containing long-chain fatty acids, intracellular signal-transducing ceramides are not O-acylated and have acyl chain lengths of 16 and 18 carbon atoms. We present here a review of our present knowledge on the sphingomyelin cycle as a possible signal transduction pathway in the human epidermis. We discuss the common origin of extracellular ceramides constituting the lipid barrier and of intracellular ceramides generated by agonist-stimulated sphingomyelin hydrolysis and serving as second messengers. A summary of alterations in sphingolipid metabolism and lipid composition of the epidermis in diseased skin is also given and the possible use of different sphingolipids for therapy is envisaged.

