
Insulin resistance is associated with both obesity and hypertension. However, the cellular mechanisms of insulin resistance in genetic models of obese-hypertension have not been identified. The objective of the present study was to investigate the effects of genetic obesity on a background of inherited hypertension on initial components of the insulin signal transduction pathway and glucose transport in skeletal muscle and liver. Oral glucose tolerance testing in SHROB demonstrated a sustained postchallenge elevation in plasma glucose at 180 and 240 min compared with lean spontaneously hypertensive rat (SHR) littermates, which is suggestive of glucose intolerance. Fasting plasma insulin levels were elevated 18-fold in SHROB. The rate of insulin-stimulated 3-O-methylglucose transport was reduced 68% in isolated epitrochlearis muscles from the SHROB compared with SHR. Insulin-stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation of the insulin receptor beta-subunit and insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) in intact skeletal muscle of SHROB was reduced by 36 and 23%, respectively, compared with SHR, due primarily to 32 and 60% decreases in insulin receptor and IRS-1 protein expression, respectively. The amounts of p85 alpha regulatory subunit of phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase and GLUT-4 protein were reduced by 28 and 25% in SHROB muscle compared with SHR. In the liver of SHROB, the effect of insulin on tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-1 was not changed, but insulin receptor phosphorylation was decreased by 41%, compared with SHR, due to a 30% reduction in insulin receptor levels. Our observations suggest that the leptin receptor mutation fak imposed on a hypertensive background results in extreme hyperinsulinemia, glucose intolerance, and decreased expression of postreceptor insulin signaling proteins in skeletal muscle. Despite these changes, hypertension is not exacerbated in SHROB compared with SHR, suggesting these metabolic abnormalities may not contribute to hypertension in this model of Syndrome X.

