
We have reported that pretreatment of rat FRTL-5 thyroid cells with thyrotropin (TSH) markedly potentiates the mitogenic response to insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I). The present study was undertaken to determine whether the augmentation by cAMP of IGF-I-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation of known IGF-I receptor substrates plays an important role in the cAMP-dependent potentiation of DNA synthesis induced by IGF-I. Pretreatment with TSH or dibutyryl cAMP did not affect the IGF-I-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1). In contrast, cAMP pretreatment potentiated the tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-2 induced by IGF-I, but did not affect the amount of IRS-2. We found that the IGF-I-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation of 66 kDa Shc (Src homology collagen) was markedly increased by cAMP pretreatment, and that this change was mainly due to an increase in the levels of 66 kDa Shc protein. Under these conditions, cAMP pretreatment significantly increased binding of Grb2 (growth-factor-receptor-bound protein 2) to Shc in response to IGF-I, and activation of MAP kinase (mitogen-activated protein kinase) induced by IGF-I was also enhanced by cAMP. The presence of PD98059, an inhibitor of MEK (MAP-kinase/Erk kinase), during treatment with IGF-I partially inhibited the cAMP-dependent augmentation of DNA synthesis in response to IGF-I. On the other hand, cAMP pretreatment increased binding of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI 3-kinase) p85 subunit to IRS-2, which was reflected in PI 3-kinase activity. LY294002, a PI 3-kinase inhibitor, strongly depressed IGF-I-dependent DNA synthesis after pretreatment with and without TSH or dibutyryl cAMP. Our results suggest that the interaction between cAMP-dependent and IGF-I-dependent pathways leads to an augmentation of cell proliferation, which is mediated, at least in part, through the MAP kinase and PI 3-kinase signalling pathways. These effects are mediated by changes in tyrosine phosphorylation of IGF-I receptor substrates, including IRS-2 and Shc.

