
B-cell superantigens (SAgs) interact with normal human nonimmune immunoglobulins (Igs) independently of the light-chain isotype, and activate a large proportion of the B-cell repertoire. Recently, the major envelope protein of human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1), gp120, was found to exhibit SAg-like properties for B cells with potential pathological consequences for the infected host, including accelerated apoptosis and progressive loss of B cells. This unconventional mode of interaction contrasts with its binding to immunization-induced antibodies, which requires the tertiary structure of the heavy- and light-chain variable regions. Examining the temporal development of V(H)3+ antibodies in HIV-1-infected subjects over a 7-yr period showed that V(H)3+ antibodies specific for the gp120 SAg-binding site are deficient. Quantification of V(H)3+ antibodies, which impart protective responses to infectious agents, in serum samples from HIV-seropositive slow progressors and from patients who progressed to AIDS-related manifestations reveals that paucity in V(H)3+ antibodies is a marker of rapid clinical decline. Remarkably, anti-gp160 V(H)3+ antibodies show a gradual decrease in progressors and vary with time, depending on the viral load. Thus, V(H)3+ antibodies could play an important role in protection, and their underexpression may accelerate disease progression. Investigation of the structural basis of the interaction between human Igs and gp120 shows that the viral gp120 SAg can interact only with a subset of human V(H)3+ Igs. A number of amino acid-positions present primarily in the first and third framework regions of the Ig heavy-chain variable regions correlate with gp120 binding. These residues partially overlap with the Staphylococcus aureus protein A-binding site for V(H)3+ Igs. Overall, these interactions could represent a novel mechanism of humoral deficiency resulting from the capacity of a viral SAg to impact an important subset of the B-cell repertoire and to induce B-cell death by apoptosis.

