
We assessed the time-dependent effects of intraperitoneal (i.p.) and intravenous (i.v.) application of dexamethasone (Dexa) on the mean arterial blood pressure (MAP), heart rate (HR) and total blood volume (TBV). We evaluated also the relation between the effects and immunoreactivities of transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-β), epithelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS), interleukin-1 beta (IL1-β) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in rat brain, lung and kidney tissues. Rats were anesthetized and while still breathing spontaneously, a tracheotomy and femoral vein and artery catheterizations were performed. To determine TBV using the hemodilution method, 2 ml albumin-electrolyte solutions were applied by i.v. injection. Group 1 (control group) received a 1 ml bolus injection of physiologic saline, Group 2 received 15 mg/kg and Group 3 received 75 mg/kg Dexa i.p. The hematocrit was measured at 10, 20, 60 and 120 min. For each animal, the values of MAP, HR and TBV were measured within 2 h. For immunohistochemical evaluation, anti-TGF-β, anti-eNOS, anti-IL1-β and anti-VEGF primary antibodies were tested using the avidin-biotin-peroxidase method. TBV was decreased in Group 1 and the increase in MAP was statistically significant. HR values increased slightly. None of the values changed significantly in Group 2. Although TBV was unchanged in Group 3, the decrease in MAP was statistically significant. HR values increased, but the increase was not statistically significant. Mild IL1-β immunoreactivity and moderate TGF-β, eNOS and VEGF immunoreactivities were observed in the brain, lung and kidney samples in Group 1. Increased eNOS immunoreactivity in the kidney samples were observed in Group 2. eNOS immunoreactivity was as strong in the brain and the kidney samples in Group 3. Decreased VEGF immunoreactivity was observed in the lung and kidney tissues in Group 3. Significantly decreased TGF-β immunoreactivity was observed in all tissue samples in Group 3. The decreased MAP values in Group 3 differed from those in Groups 1 and 2. Despite increased eNOS immunoreactivity, especially in brain and kidney, the decrease in VEGF immunoreactivity in Group 3, especially lung and kidney, were consistent with a drop in blood pressure.

