
The metabotropic glutamate 1a (mGlu1a) receptor is a G protein-coupled receptor linked with phosphoinositide (PI) hydrolysis and with β-arrestin-1-mediated sustained extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) phosphorylation and cytoprotective signaling. Previously, we reported the existence of ligand bias at this receptor, inasmuch as glutamate induced both effects, whereas quisqualate induced only PI hydrolysis. In the current study, we showed that mGlu1 receptor agonists such as glutamate, aspartate, and l-cysteate were unbiased and activated both signaling pathways, whereas quisqualate and (S)-3,5-dihydroxyphenylglycine stimulated only PI hydrolysis. Competitive antagonists inhibited only PI hydrolysis and not the β-arrestin-dependent pathway, whereas a noncompetitive mGlu1 receptor antagonist blocked both pathways. Mutational analysis of the ligand binding domain of the mGlu1a receptor revealed that Thr188 residues were essential for PI hydrolysis but not for protective signaling, whereas Arg323 and Lys409 residues were required for β-arrestin-1-mediated sustained ERK phosphorylation and cytoprotective signaling but not for PI hydrolysis. Therefore, the mechanism of ligand bias appears to involve different modes of agonist interactions with the receptor ligand binding domain. Although some mGlu1a receptor agonists are biased toward PI hydrolysis, we identified two endogenous compounds, glutaric acid and succinic acid, as new mGlu1 receptor agonists that are fully biased toward β-arrestin-mediated protective signaling. Pharmacological studies indicated that, in producing the two effects, glutamate interacted in two distinct ways with mGlu1 receptors, inasmuch as competitive mGlu1 receptor antagonists that blocked PI hydrolysis did not inhibit cytoprotective signaling. Quisqualate, which is biased toward PI hydrolysis, failed to inhibit glutamate-induced protection, and glutaric acid, which is biased toward protection, did not interfere with glutamate-induced PI hydrolysis. Taken together, these data indicate that ligand bias at mGlu1 receptors is attributable to different modes of receptor-glutamate interactions, which are differentially coupled to PI hydrolysis and β-arrestin-mediated cytoprotective signaling, and they reveal the existence of new endogenous agonists acting at mGlu1 receptors.

