
Ca2+ and Ca(2+)-binding proteins are involved in running the cell cycle. Ca2+ spikes and signals from integrin-activated focal adhesion complexes and Ca2+ receptors on the cell surface along with cyclic AMP begin the cycle of cyclin-dependent protein kinases (PKs). These transiently expressed PKs stimulate the coordinate expression of DNA-replicating enzymes, activate replication enzymes, inactivate replication suppressors (e.g., retinoblastoma susceptibility protein), activate the replicator complexes at the end of the G1 build-up, and when replication is complete they and a Ca2+ spike trigger mitotic prophase. Another Ca2+ surge at the end of metaphase triggers the destruction of the prophase-stimulating PKs and starts anaphase. Ca2+ finally stimulates cytoplasmic division (cytokinesis). However, Ca2+ does more than this in epithelial cells, such as those lining the colon, and skin keratinocytes. These cells also need Ca2+, integrin signals, and only a small amount (e.g., 0.05-0.1 mM) of external Ca2+ to start DNA replication. Signals from their surface Ca2+ receptors trigger a combination of differentiation and apoptosis ("diffpoptosis") when external Ca2+ concentration reaches their setpoints. The skin's steep, upwardly directed, Ca2+ gradient has a low concentration in the basal layer to allow stem and precursor keratinocytes to proliferate, and higher concentrations in the suprabasal layers to trigger the differentiation-apoptosis ("diffpoptosis") mechanism that converts granular cells into protective, hard-shelled, dead corneocytes. A similar Ca2+ gradient may exist in the colon crypt allowing the stem cell and its amplifying transit or precursor offspring to cycle in the lower parts of the crypt, while stopping proliferation and stimulating terminal differentiation in the upper crypt and flat mucosa. Raising the amount of Ca2+ in fecal water above a critical level reduces proliferation and thus colorectal carcinogenesis in normal rats and some high-risk humans. But during carcinogenesis the Ca2+ sensors malfunction or their signals become ineffective: high Ca2+ does not stop, and may even stimulate, the proliferation of initiated mutants. Therefore, Ca2+ may either not affect, or even promote, the growth of epithelial cells in carcinogen-initiated rat colon and human adenoma patients. Clearly, a much greater understanding of how Ca2+ controls the proliferation and differentiation of epithelial cells and why initiated cells lose their responsiveness to Ca2+ are needed to assess the drawbacks and advantages of using Ca2+ as a chemopreventor.

