
We have characterized the cDNA for a Rho GTPase activating protein (GAP) mapping to chromosome 13q12. The cDNA was characterized by determining the complete sequence of a 4.8 kb cDNA clone that represents the 5' untranslated region (UTR), the translated region, and the 3' UTR. The protein has a sterile alpha-motif (SAM), a distinct GAP domain, and a conserved START (StAR related lipid transfer) domain. The cDNA has 5 instability motifs (ATTTA) in the 3' UTR and one motif in the translated region between GAP and START domains. The RhoGAP transcript is truncated in some breast carcinoma cell lines and it has low expression in other breast cancer cell lines as compared to a normal breast cell line. We have previously observed the absence of RhoGAP transcript in a breast tumor specimen. A GST-fusion of the RhoGAP was tested for its specificity on RhoA, Cdc42, and Rac1. The protein was most active for RhoA. Transfection of RhoGAP into MCF7 cells significantly inhibited cell growth. The introduction of the RhoGAP construct into MDAMB231 cells that had previously been transfected with a p21 construct did not affect cell proliferation, indicating the involvement of p21 in Rho-mediated proliferation of cancer cells. NIH3T3 cells overexpressing RhoGAP showed considerable inhibition of stress fiber formation. Several cDNAs were identified as RhoGAP interactors by using the yeast two-hybrid assay system. These cDNAs correspond to SWI/SNF, alpha-tubulin, HMG CoA reductase, and TAX1 binding protein (TAX1BP1). The interaction with HMG CoA reductase may partially explain the growth inhibition of breast carcinoma cells by statin class of cholesterol lowering drugs. The biological significance of the interacting proteins is discussed in the context of their involvement in tumorigenesis. Our results indicate that loss of RhoGAP or its altered activity suppresses the growth of breast tumor cells. The presence of various motifs in RhoGAP and its interaction with several other proteins suggest that the protein may regulate Rho signaling in multiple ways and possibly function in a Rho-independent manner.

