
Transient stimulation of group I metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs) induces persistent prolonged epileptiform discharges in hippocampal slices via a protein synthesis-dependent process. At present, the signaling process underlying the induction of these epileptiform discharges remains unknown. We examined the possible role of extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERK1 and ERK2) because these kinases can be activated by group I mGluRs, and their activation may regulate gene expression and alter protein synthesis. The group I mGluR agonist (S)-3,5-dihydroxyphenylglycine (DHPG; 50 microm) induced activation of ERK1/2 in hippocampal slices. 2-(2-Diamino-3-methoxyphenyl-4H-1-benzopyran-4-one (PD98059) (50 microm) a specific inhibitor of mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK), suppressed ERK1/2 activation by DHPG. PD98059 or another MEK inhibitor, 1,4-diamino-2,3-dicyano-1,4-bis[2-aminophenylthio]butadiene (10 microm), also prevented the induction of the prolonged epileptiform discharges by DHPG. In the presence of ionotropic glutamate receptor inhibitors and tetrodotoxin (blockers), DHPG-induced epileptiform discharges were suppressed, whereas ERK1/2 activation persisted. Protein kinase C inhibitors (2-[1-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)-5-methoxyindol-3-yl]-3-(1H-indol-3-yl) maleimide, 1 microm; or chelerythrine, 10 microm) did not prevent the generation of DHPG-induced epileptiform discharges, nor did they suppress the activation of ERK1/2 by DHPG in slices pretreated with the blockers. Genistein (30 microm), a broad-spectrum tyrosine kinase inhibitor, suppressed the DHPG-induced epileptiform discharges and the ERK1/2 activation in the presence of blockers. Induction of DHPG-mediated epileptiform discharges was also suppressed by 4-amino-5-(4-chlorophenyl)-7-(t-butyl)pyrazolo[3,4-D]pyrimidine (10 microm), an Src-family tyrosine kinase inhibitor. The study shows that group I mGluRs activate ERK1/2 through a tyrosine kinase-dependent process and that this activation of ERK1/2 is necessary for the induction of prolonged epileptiform discharges in the hippocampus.

