
An important focus in cell biology is understanding how different feedback mechanisms regulate G protein-coupled receptor systems. Toward this end we investigated the regulation of endogenous beta(2) adrenergic receptors (beta2ARs) and phosphodiesterases (PDEs) by measuring cAMP signals in single HEK-293 cells. We monitored cAMP signals using genetically encoded cyclic nucleotide-gated (CNG) channels. This high resolution approach allowed us to make several observations. (a) Exposure of cells to 1 muM isoproterenol triggered transient increases in cAMP levels near the plasma membrane. Pretreatment of cells with 10 muM rolipram, a PDE4 inhibitor, prevented the decline in the isoproterenol-induced cAMP signals. (b) 1 muM isoproterenol triggered a sustained, twofold increase in phosphodiesterase type 4 (PDE4) activity. (c) The decline in isoproterenol-dependent cAMP levels was not significantly altered by including 20 nM PKI, a PKA inhibitor, or 3 muM 59-74E, a GRK inhibitor, in the pipette solution; however, the decline in the cAMP levels was prevented when both PKI and 59-74E were included in the pipette solution. (d) After an initial 5-min stimulation with isoproterenol and a 5-min washout, little or no recovery of the signal was observed during a second 5-min stimulation with isoproterenol. (e) The amplitude of the signal in response to the second isoproterenol stimulation was not altered when PKI was included in the pipette solution, but was significantly increased when 59-74E was included. Taken together, these data indicate that either GRK-mediated desensitization of beta2ARs or PKA-mediated stimulation of PDE4 activity is sufficient to cause declines in cAMP signals. In addition, the data indicate that GRK-mediated desensitization is primarily responsible for a sustained suppression of beta2AR signaling. To better understand the interplay between receptor desensitization and PDE4 activity in controlling cAMP signals, we developed a mathematical model of this system. Simulations of cAMP signals using this model are consistent with the experimental data and demonstrate the importance of receptor levels, receptor desensitization, basal adenylyl cyclase activity, and regulation of PDE activity in controlling cAMP signals, and hence, on the overall sensitivity of the system.

