
Rat chorda tympani (CT) responses to NH4Cl, ammonium acetate (NH4Ac), and ammonium hippurate (NH4Hp) were obtained during simultaneous current and voltage clamping of the lingual field potential. Although functional and developmental similarities for gustation have been reported for NH4+ and K+ salts, we report here that significant differences are discernible in the CT responses to both salts. Unlike neural responses to KCl, those to NH4Cl are voltage sensitive, enhanced by submucosa negative and suppressed by positive voltage clamp. In this regard, NH4Cl responses are qualitatively similar to NaCl responses; however, the magnitude of NH4Cl voltage sensitivity is significantly less than that of NaCl. The concentration dependence of the CT response to NH4Cl manifests a biphasic nonlinear relationship not observed with KCl or NaCl. Below 0.3 M, the CT response increases as if to approach a saturation value. However, beyond 0.3 M an inflection appears in the CT-concentration curve because of an abrupt increase in CT responses. This kinetic profile is Cl-dependent and is correlated with an increase in transepithelial conductance that displays similar NH4Cl concentration dependence. The biphasic relation to salt concentration is not observed when acetate or hippurate is substituted for Cl-. As with Na+ and K+ salts, less mobile anions than Cl- (Ac- and Hp-) lower the CT responses. However, like Na+ salts, but in contrast to K+ salts, the onset kinetics of CT responses to NH4Ac or NH4Hp remained rapid, even under positive voltage-clamp conditions. Amiloride (100 microM) partially suppresses CT responses within the concentration range of 0.05-0.3 M (48-20% suppression). Amiloride also suppresses the voltage sensitivity of NH4Cl CT responses, but does not eliminate the sensitivity as it does for Na+ salts. In conclusion, the data suggest that taste transduction for NH4 salts is mediated over two NH+ conduction pathways in the taste bud. This is especially evident with NH4Cl, where the CT-concentration curves show two distinct kinetic regimes. Below 0.3 M the saturation with increasing concentration, clamp voltage response dependence, and amiloride sensitivity suggest an apical membrane transduction conductance. Above 0.3 M, the high anion dependence of the response and its amiloride insensitivity indicate participation of the paracellular pathway in transduction.

