
The oligosaccharide chains of pituitary glycoprotein hormones such as human thyroid-stimulating hormone (hTSH) have been shown to be important in biosynthesis, subunit association, secretion and bioactivity. However, the exact biological significance of these glycosylation variants (isoforms) remains controversial. The aim of this paper is to investigate the role of hTSH glycosylation variants in signal transduction. Human pituitary standard TSH (2nd International Reference Preparation 80/558; IRP-hTSH) was treated with neuraminidase, fractionated by isoelectric focusing (IEF) and affinity chromatography using the lectins concanavalin A (Con A) and lentil. To determine the in vitro bioactivity of these hTSH isoforms, simultaneous measurement of cAMP formation and inositol phosphates release was applied in two different cell systems (CHO cells stably and Cos-7 cells transiently transfected with hTSHR cDNA). Desialylated TSH variants showed a significantly increased ratio of bioactivity to immunoreactivity for cAMP production in CHO-R cells (B/I ratio desialylated variants: 3.54 +/- 0.005; B/I ratio sialylated variants: 2.84 +/- 0.01 P < 0.05). Testing the bioactivity of hTSH glycosylation variants isolated by IEF, we found basic variants to be significantly more active than acidic ones in stimulating the cAMP formation in CHO-R cells (B/I ratio basic variants: 9.92 +/- 0.64; neutral variants: 5.98 +/- 0.07; acidic variants: 2.80 +/- 0.12; P < 0.01). There were no differences in stimulation of IP-release. High-mannose TSH variants (firmly bound to Con A) showed greater potency to stimulate cAMP formation and IP-release in both CHO-R and Cos-7 cells than biantennary TSH variants (weakly bound to Con A). Both core-fucosylated (lentil-bound) and core-unfucosylated (lentil-unbound) TSH variants proved to be strong stimulators of cAMP release in CHO and Cos-7 cells. In CHO-R (Cos-7) cells, 400 microU/ml core-fucosylated TSH stimulated cAMP formation 14(2.6)-fold, core-unfucosylated TSH 7.3(2.3)-fold over control values. In contrast to our findings of cAMP activation by both core-fucosylated and core-unfucosylated TSH variants, release of IPs was stimulated only by, core-fucosylated (lentil-bound) TSH variants and not by TSH variants lacking core-fucose residues (lentil-unbound TSH). This was true for both CHO-R and Cos-7 cells. The lentil-unbound TSH therefore showed an identical differential activation of signal transduction pathways in two different cell systems: strong stimulation of the cAMP-cascade without activation of IPs release (P < 0.05). In conclusion, we showed for the first time for TSH that the two dominant intracellular signal transduction systems (cAMP formation and IPs release) are activated to different degrees by hTSH glycosylation variants.

