
Activation of the tyrosine kinase JAK2 is an essential step in cellular signaling by growth hormone (GH) and multiple other hormones and cytokines. Murine JAK2 has a total of 49 tyrosines which, if phosphorylated, could serve as docking sites for Src homology 2 (SH2) or phosphotyrosine binding domain-containing signaling molecules. Using a yeast two-hybrid screen of a rat adipocyte cDNA library, we identified a splicing variant of the SH2 domain-containing protein SH2-B, designated SH2-Bbeta, as a JAK2-interacting protein. The carboxyl terminus of SH2-Bbeta (SH2-Bbetac), which contains the SH2 domain, specifically interacts with kinase-active, tyrosyl-phosphorylated JAK2 but not kinase-inactive, unphosphorylated JAK2 in the yeast two-hybrid system. In COS cells coexpressing SH2-Bbeta or SH2-Bbetac and murine JAK2, both SH2-Bbetac and SH2-Bbeta coimmunoprecipitate to a significantly greater extent with wild-type, tyrosyl-phosphorylated JAK2 than with kinase-inactive, unphosphorylated JAK2. SH2-Bbetac also binds to immunoprecipitated wild-type but not kinase-inactive JAK2 in a far Western blot. In 3T3-F442A cells, GH stimulates the interaction of SH2-Bbeta with tyrosyl-phosphorylated JAK2 both in vitro, as assessed by binding of JAK2 in cell lysates to glutathione S-transferase (GST)-SH2-Bbetac or GST-SH2-Bbeta fusion proteins, and in vivo, as assessed by coimmunoprecipitation of JAK2 with SH2-Bbeta. GH promoted a transient and dose-dependent tyrosyl phosphorylation of SH2-Bbeta in 3T3-F442A cells, further suggesting the involvement of SH2-Bbeta in GH signaling. Consistent with SH2-Bbeta being a substrate of JAK2, SH2-Bbetac is tyrosyl phosphorylated when coexpressed with wild-type but not kinase-inactive JAK2 in both yeast and COS cells. SH2-Bbeta was also tyrosyl phosphorylated in response to gamma interferon, a cytokine that activates JAK2 and JAK1. These data suggest that GH-induced activation and phosphorylation of JAK2 recruits SH2-Bbeta and its associated signaling molecules into a GHR-JAK2 complex, thereby initiating some as yet unidentified signal transduction pathways. These pathways are likely to be shared by other cytokines that activate JAK2.

