
Thyroid cancers are the most common malignancy of the endocrine system in humans. To understand the molecular genetic events underlying thyroid carcinogenesis, we have generated a mouse model that spontaneously develops follicular thyroid carcinoma similar to human thyroid cancer (Thrb(PV/PV) mouse). This mutant mouse harbors a dominant-negative mutated thyroid hormone receptor β (denoted PV). The PV mutation was identified in a patient with resistance to thyroid hormone (TH). Thrb(PV/PV) mice exhibit highly elevated serum thyroid-stimulating hormone levels and increased TH. We have previously shown that thyroid-stimulating hormone is required, but not sufficient to induce metastatic follicular thyroid cancer in Thrb(PV/PV) mice. However, whether the elevated TH also contributes to the thyroid carcinogenesis of Thrb(PV/PV) mice was not elucidated. To understand the role of TH in thyroid carcinogenesis, we blocked the production of TH by treating Thrb(PV/PV) mice with propylthiouracil (Thrb(PV/PV)-PTU mice) and compared the development of thyroid cancer in Thrb(PV/PV)-PTU and untreated Thrb(PV/PV) mice. We found that thyroid tumor growth was reduced by ∼42% in Thrb(PV/PV)-PTU mice as compared with Thrb(PV/PV) mice. Analysis by bromodeoxyuridine-nuclear labeling showed decreased incorporation of bromodeoxyuridine in thyroid tumor cells of Thrb(PV/PV)-PTU mice, indicative of decreased tumor cell proliferation. However, cleaved-caspase 3 staining showed no apparent changes in apoptosis of tumor cells in Thrb(PV/PV)-PTU mice. Molecular studies identified a marked attenuation of the PI3K-AKT-β-catenin signaling pathway that led to decreased protein levels of cyclin D2, thereby decreasing tumor cell proliferation in Thrb(PV/PV)-PTU mice. Furthermore, matrix metalloproteinase-2, a downstream target of β-catenin and a key regulator during tumor invasion and metastasis, was also decreased. Thus, the present study uncovers a critical role of TH in promoting the thyroid carcinogenesis of Thrb(PV/PV) mice via membrane signaling events. Importantly, these findings suggest that anti-thyroid drugs could be considered as possible therapeutic agents of thyroid cancer.

