
Growth hormone (GH) is found in the retina and vitreous of the chick embryo, where it appears to act as a growth and differentiation factor, having neuroprotective effects on retinal ganglion cells (RGCs). Here, we review the molecular mechanisms of the anti-apoptotic effect of GH in chick RGCs. GH treatment of RGCs reduces Akt levels, while raising Akt-phos levels, consistent with a role for Akt signaling pathways in the GH neuroprotective action. The induction of apoptosis by immunoneutralization with GH antiserum is accompanied by an increase in caspase-3 and caspase-9 activation, and also PARP-1 cleavage. Calpain activation also appears to be a major caspase-independent pathway to PARP-1 cleavage and apoptosis in these cells, supporting the view that caspase and calpain inhibitors are major neuroprotective agents for RGCs, and that pathways that activate both caspases and calpains are important for the anti-apoptotic actions of GH in these cells. These pathways involve the activation of cytosolic tyrosine kinases (Trks) and extracellular-signal-related kinases (ERKs). Occupation of the GH receptor by GH involves downstream intracellular Trk pathways. The Akt and Trk pathways appear to converge on the activation of cAMP response element binding protein (CREB), which is able to initiate transcription of pro- or anti-apoptotic genes. These results indicate that the action of GH in the neuroprotection of embryonic RGCs involves pathways common to with other neurotrophins, and that GH can be considered to be a growth and differentiation factor in the development of the embryonic retina. We have also investigated the relationship between the overlapping anti-apoptotic effects of GH and insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), two functionally closely related factors. We find that simultaneous immunoneutralization of GH and IGF-1 does not increase the level of apoptosis in the cultures above that achieved by immunoneutralization of GH alone. We therefore conclude that the neuroprotective actions of GH in the developing retina are likely mediated in large part through the action of IGF-1.

