
Endothelial cells have the capacity to metabolize several important lipids; this includes the ability to store and then metabolize arachidonate, as well as the capacity to synthesize platelet-activating factor (1-O-alkyl-2-acetyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine). Arachidonate is predominantly metabolized via cyclooxygenase to PGI2 although the spectrum of prostaglandins may vary depending upon the source of the endothelial cell. Biosynthesis of eicosanoids and PAF are likely to be an important physiologic function of the endothelial cell as these potent lipids appear to have a role in maintaining vascular tone and mediating interactions of the endothelium with circulating inflammatory cells. In addition to production of eicosanoids and PAF, endothelial cells metabolize exogenous arachidonate and arachidonate metabolites and other fatty acids such as linoleate to bioactive compounds (HODEs). There is also evidence that small amounts of arachidonate are metabolized via a lipoxygenase. The physiologic significance of these minor lipid pathways is not known at this time. Production of eicosanoids and PAF is not a constitutive function of the endothelial cell. Lipid biosynthesis by endothelial cells is one component of the early activation response that occurs in response to stimulation with pro-inflammatory and vasoactive hormones or to pathologic agents such as oxidants and bacterial toxins. A central mechanism for activation of the relevant pathways is a rise in cellular calcium concentrations that can be mediated by hormone-receptor-binding or by direct permeabilization of the cell membrane to calcium (Fig. 3). Regulatory mechanisms distal to the calcium signal are unknown, but current evidence suggests that calcium directly or indirectly activates phospholipases that release arachidonate from phospholipids and hydrolyze a specific phospholipid to the immediate precursor of PAF. There is evidence that protein kinase C may, in part, regulate this process, but the role of other potential regulatory components, such as other protein kinases or G-proteins is not known. As noted above, the most direct mechanism for initiation of PAF biosynthesis and arachidonate release would be activation of a phospholipase A2 as shown in Fig. 3. Activation of other phospholipases (e.g. phospholipase C) may contribute to the total amount of arachidonate released, although the magnitude of that contribution is not yet known. In addition to generation of PAF and eicosanoids, activation of endothelial cell phospholipases generates second messengers that are important in intracellular signaling (Fig. 4). Activation of phospholipase C, in response to hormonal stimulation, generates diacylglycerol and inositol phosphates from phosphatidylinositol. Each of these is a potent intracellular second messenger.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

