
The concept of permanent narrowing of the airways resulting from chronic inflammation and fibrosis is called remodeling and is a common feature of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The eicosanoid contractile agents thromboxane A(2) (TxA(2)) and cysteinyl-leukotriene D(4) (LTD(4)) are among the recognized mitogens for human airway smooth muscle (ASM) cells. Statins are known to possess anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory properties that are independent on their cholesterol-lowering effects and may result in clinical lung benefits. Rosuvastatin is the last agent of the lipid-lowering drugs to be introduced and experimental evidence indicates that it possess favorable pleiotropic effects in the cardiovascular and nervous systems. Yet, no data is available in the literature regarding its effects on human airway remodeling. The present study was aimed at examining the effect of rosuvastatin and the involvement of prenylated proteins in the response of human ASM cells to serum, epidermal growth factor (EGF) and eicosanoid contractile mitogens that activate TxA(2) prostanoid and LTD(4) receptors.

Cell growth was assessed by nuclear incorporation of [(3)H]thymidine in human ASM cells serum-starved and then stimulated for 48 h in MEM plus 0.1% BSA containing mitogens in the absence and presence of modulators of the mevalonate and prenylation pathways.

We found that rosuvastatin dose-dependently inhibited serum-, EGF-, the TxA(2) stable analog U46619-, and LTD(4)-induced human ASM cells growth. All these effects were prevented by pretreatment with mevalonate. Addition of the prenylation substrates farnesol and geranylgeraniol reversed the effect of rosuvastatin on EGF and U46619, respectively. Interestingly, only mevalonate showed restoration of cell growth following rosuvastatin treatment in LTD(4) and LTD(4) plus EGF treated cells, suggesting a possible involvement of both farnesylated and geranylgeranylated proteins in the cysteinyl-LT-induced cell growth.

The hydrophilic statin rosuvastatin exerts direct effects on human ASM cells mitogenic response in vitro by inhibiting prenylation of signaling proteins, likely small G proteins. These findings are consistent with previous observed involvement of small GTPase signaling in EGF- and U46619-induced human airway proliferation and corroborate the recent interest in the potential clinical benefits of statins in asthma/COPD.

