
Signalling of several G-protein-coupled receptors of the Gq/11 family is time-dependently inhibited by local anaesthetics (LAs). Since LA-induced modulation of muscarinic m1 and m3 receptor function may explain their beneficial effects in clinical practice, such as decreased postoperative cognitive dysfunction or less bronchoconstriction, we studied how prolonged exposure affects muscarinic signalling (Wang D, Wu X, Li J, Xiao F, Liu X, Meng M. The effect of lidocaine on early postoperative cognitive dysfunction after coronary artery bypass surgery. Anesth Analg 2002; 95: 1134-41; Groeben H, Silvanus MT, Beste M, Peters J. Combined lidocaine and salbutamol inhalation for airway anesthesia markedly protects against reflex bronchoconstriction. Chest 2000; 118: 509-15).

A two-electrode voltage clamp was used to assess the effects of lidocaine or its permanently charged analogue QX314 on recombinantly expressed m1 and m3 receptors in Xenopus oocytes. Antisense knock-down of functional Gαq-protein and inhibition of protein kinase C (PKC) served to define mechanisms and sites of action.

Lidocaine affected muscarinic signalling in a biphasic way: an initial decrease in methylcholine bromide-elicited m1 and m3 responses after 30 min, followed by a significant increase in muscarinic responses after 8 h. Intracellularly injected QX314 time-dependently inhibited muscarinic signalling, but had no effect in Gαq-depleted oocytes. PKC-antagonism enhanced m1 and m3 signalling, but completely abolished the LA-induced increase in muscarinic responses, unmasking an underlying time-dependent inhibition of m1 and m3 responses after 8 h.

Lidocaine modulates muscarinic m1 and m3 receptors in a time- and Gαq-dependent manner, but this is masked by enhanced PKC activity. The biphasic time course may be due to interactions of LAs with an extracellular receptor domain, modulated by PKC activity. Prolonged exposure to LAs may not benefit pulmonary function, but may positively affect postoperative cognitive function.

