
F508del is the most common cystic fibrosis-causing mutation that induces early degradation and poor trafficking of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) chloride channels to the apical membrane of epithelial cells. Our previous work in bronchial serous cells showed that vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) stimulation of the VPAC(1) receptor enhances CFTR-dependent chloride secretion by increasing its membrane insertion by a protein kinase C (PKC)-dependent pathway. In the present study, we investigated the effect of VIP on F508del-CFTR activity and membrane insertion in the human nasal epithelial cell line JME/CF15, which also expresses the VPAC(1) receptor. At reduced temperature (27 degrees C), which rescues F508del-CFTR trafficking, acute stimulation by VIP of rescued F508del-CFTR channels was protein kinase A (PKA)- and PKC-dependent. One hour of treatment with VIP strongly increased F508del-CFTR activity, with iodide efflux peaks three times higher than with untreated cells. At 37 degrees C, VIP-treated cells, but not untreated controls, showed significant iodide efflux peaks that were sensitive to the CFTR inhibitor 3-[(3-trifluoromethyl)phenyl]-5-[(4-carboxyphenyl)methylene]-2-thioxo-4-thiazolidinone (CFTR(inh)-172). Immunostaining, biotinylation assays, and Western blots confirmed a VIP-induced maturation and membrane insertion of F508del-CFTR at 37 degrees C. The corrector effect of VIP was abolished by the PKA inhibitor N-[2-(p-bromocinnamylamino)ethyl]-5-isoquinolinesulfonamidedihydrochloride (H89), whereas Galpha(s) stimulation by cholera toxin significantly increased F508del-CFTR trafficking. On the other hand, membrane localization, but not maturation, of F508del-CFTR was significantly reduced by the PKC inhibitor bisindolylmaleimide X and the G(i/o) protein inhibitor pertussis toxin. VIP treatment had no effect on intracellular calcium or proteasome activity. These results indicate that, in human nasal cells, VIP rescues trafficking and membrane insertion of functional F508del-CFTR channels at physiological temperature by stimulating both PKA- and PKC-dependent pathways.

