
Cysteinyl leukotriene (CysLT) is one of the proinflammatory mediators released by the bronchi during inflammation. CysLTs exert their biological effects via specific G-protein-coupled receptors. CysLT(1) receptor antagonists are available for clinical use for the treatment of asthma. Recently, crosstalk between CysLT(1) and P2Y(6) receptors has been delineated. P2Y receptors are expressed in apical and/or basolateral membranes of virtually all polarized epithelia to control the transport of fluid and electrolytes. Previous research suggests that CysLT(1) receptor antagonists inhibit the effects of nucleotides acting at P2Y receptors. However, the detailed molecular mechanism underlying the inhibition remains unresolved.

In this study, western blot analysis confirmed that both CysLT(1) and P2Y(6) receptors were expressed in the human bronchial epithelial cell line 16HBE14o-. All three CysLT(1) antagonists inhibited the uridine diphosphate (UDP)-evoked I(SC), but only montelukast inhibited the UDP-evoked [Ca(2+)](i) increase. In the presence of forskolin or 8-bromoadenosine 3'5' cyclic monophosphate (8-Br-cAMP), the UDP-induced I(SC) was potentiated but was reduced by pranlukast and zafirlukast but not montelukast. Pranlukast inhibited the UDP-evoked I(SC) potentiated by an Epac activator, 8-(4-Chlorophenylthio)-2'-O-methyladenosine-3',5'-cyclic monophosphate (8-CPT-2'-O-Me-cAMP), while montelukast and zafirlukast had no such effect. Pranlukast inhibited the real-time increase in cAMP changes activated by 8-CPT-2'-O-Me-cAMP as monitored by fluorescence resonance energy transfer imaging. Zafirlukast inhibited the UDP-induced I(SC) potentiated by N(6)-Phenyladenosine-3',5'-cyclic monophosphorothioate, Sp-isomer (Sp-6-Phe-cAMP; a PKA activator) and UDP-activated PKA activity.

In summary, our data strongly suggest for the first time that in human airway epithelia, the three specific CysLT(1) receptor antagonists exert differential inhibitory effects on P2Y(6) receptor-coupled Ca(2+) signaling pathways and the potentiating effect on I(SC) mediated by cAMP and Epac, leading to the modulation of ion transport activities across the epithelia.

