
The parathyroid hormone 1 receptor (PTH1R), a primary regulator of mineral ion homeostasis, is expressed on both the apical and basolateral membranes of kidney proximal tubules and in the LLC-PK1 kidney cell line. In LLC-PK1 cells, apical PTH1R subpopulations are far more effective at signaling via phospholipase (PLC) than basolateral counterparts, revealing the presence of compartmental signaling. Apical PTH1R localization is dependent upon direct interactions with ezrin, an actin-membrane cross-linking scaffold protein. Ezrin undergoes an activation process that is dependent upon phosphorylation and binding to phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2), a lipid that is selectively concentrated to apical surfaces of polarized epithelia. Consistently, the intracellular probe for PIP2, GFP-PLCδ1-PH, localizes to the apical membranes of LLC-PK1 cells, directly overlapping ezrin and PTH1R expression. Activation of the apical PTH1R shifts the GFP-PLCδ1-PH probe from the apical membrane to the cytosol and basolateral membranes, reflecting domain-specific activation of PLC and hydrolysis of PIP2. This compartmental signaling is likely due to the polarized localization of PIP2, the substrate for PLC. PIP2 degradation using a membrane-directed phosphatase shifts ezrin localization to the cytosol and induces ezrin de-phosphorylation, processes consistent with inactivation. PIP2 degradation also shifts PTH1R expression from brush border microvilli to basolateral membranes and markedly blunts PTH-elicited activation of the MAPK pathway. Transient expression of ezrin in HEK293 cells shifts PTH1R expression from the plasma membrane to microvilli-like surface projections that also contain PIP2. As a result, ezrin enhances PTH mediated activation of the PLC pathway in this cell model with increasing total receptor surface expression. Collectively, these findings demonstrate that the apical segregation of PIP2 to the apical domains not only promotes the activation of ezrin and the subsequent formation of the PTH1R containing scaffold, but also ensures the presence of ample substrate for propagating the PLC pathway.

