
Diagnosis IMprovement in PrimAry Care Trial (D-IMPACT) was a prospective, multicentre epidemiological study in three European countries to identify the optimal subset of simple tests applied in primary care to diagnose benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) in men who spontaneously present with lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS).

Consecutive male patients aged ≥ 50 years who spontaneously attended their regular general practitioner (GP) office with LUTS were eligible for inclusion if they had not previously undergone BPH diagnostic tests or received treatment for BPH. Patients were assessed on three occasions, twice by their regular GP (visits 1 and 2) and once by a urologist (visit 3). The diagnostic accuracy of each variable was determined using the urologists' final BPH diagnosis (at visit 3) as gold-standard. Independent variables analysed were as follows: age; BPH diagnosis performed by GP in visit 1 (yes/no); probability of BPH diagnosis assessed by GP in visit 1; urinalysis (normal/abnormal); prostate-specific antigen (PSA); International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS); diagnosis of BPH performed by GP in visit 2 (yes/no); and probability of BPH diagnosis assessed by GP in visit 2. Statistically significant variables (p < 0.1) were included in a logistic regression model to identify the best algorithm and describe each test contribution.

The most frequent spontaneously reported LUTS were nocturia and weak urinary stream. BPH study prevalence was 66.0% (95%CI: 62.3-69.5) and 32% of patients were at risk of BPH progression (PSA > 1.5 ng/ml and prostate volume ≥ 30 cm(3)). Among the independent variables analysed, only age, IPSS and PSA showed a statistically significant relationship with BPH diagnosis. In a logistic regression model including age, IPSS, PSA and probability of BPH (based on physical examination and symptoms), positive predictive value (PPV) was 77.1%. Exclusion of BPH probability resulted in a PPV of 75.7%.

A diagnostic algorithm including only objective variables (age, IPSS and PSA), easily implemented in any GP office, allows GPs to accurately diagnose BPH in approximately three-quarters of patients spontaneously reporting LUTS.

