
Highly sensitized renal transplant candidates present a group at high risk for acute and chronic rejection. The probability of finding compatible donors for these recipients is significantly lower in comparison to those who have low PRA values. As a consequence, these patients spend longer time on the waiting list and become tethered to dialysis. The results of final cross match (XM) are critical for making a decision about whether such a candidate receives an organ or not. The degree of donor and recipient HLA compatibility predicts the results of XM. The goal of this study was to expand a variety of acceptable HLA-AB mismatches (MM) for high PRA kidney recipients using the HLAMATCHMAKER algorithm. This strategy focuses on the fine structural features of HLA polymorphism comprising amino acid residues or triplets (AAT), which are located in alpha-helical coils of HLA molecules and are available to antibodies. We analyzed serum samples from thirty-nine highly alloimmunized recipients (PRA > or = 85%). The level of sensitization was detected using FlowPRA Class I Screening Test. This group of transplant candidates included thirteen recipients who demonstrated negative results of final T/B FCXM and twenty-six, who were FCXM positive. The application of the HLAMATCHMAKER algorithm based on the HLA class I donor and recipient typing allowed us to detect the total number of AATMM as well as the number of immunogenic AAT in both FCXM negative and FCXM positive groups of recipients. Significantly greater numbers of both total and highly immunogenic AATMM have been emerged in the group of FCXM positive patients. Furthermore, the results of this analysis have shown a high degree of probability of positive FCXM if the number of highly immunogenic AATMM was > or = 1 (chi(2) = 22.9 Yate's correction; p = 0.000001). We did not observe overlapping between antibody specificity and permissible HLA-AB MM detected using the HLAMATCHMAKER strategy. Thus, the number of highly immunogenic AATMM can serve as a reliable predictive value for final FCXM results in highly sensitized renal transplant candidates. The HLAMATCHMAKER algorithm appears to be the proper strategy to find donors for high PRA recipients.

