
In this paper, we investigate the indirect adaptive regulation problem of unknown affine in the control nonlinear systems. The proposed approach consists of choosing an appropriate system approximation model and a proper control law, which will regulate the system under the certainty equivalence principle. The main difference from other relevant works of the literature lies in the proposal of a potent approximation model that is bilinear with respect to the tunable parameters. To deploy the bilinear model, the components of the nonlinear plant are initially approximated by Fuzzy subsystems. Then, using appropriately defined fuzzy rule indicator functions, the initial dynamical fuzzy system is translated to a dynamical neuro-fuzzy model, where the indicator functions are replaced by High Order Neural Networks (HONNS), trained by sampled system data. The fuzzy output partitions of the initial fuzzy components are also estimated based on sampled data. This way, the parameters to be estimated are the weights of the HONNs and the centers of the output partitions, both arranged in matrices of appropriate dimensions and leading to a matrix to matrix bilinear parametric model. Based on the bilinear parametric model and the design of appropriate control law we use a Lyapunov stability analysis to obtain parameter adaptation laws and to regulate the states of the system. The weight updating laws guarantee that both the identification error and the system states reach zero exponentially fast, while keeping all signals in the closed loop bounded. Moreover, introducing a method of "concurrent" parameter hopping, the updating laws are modified so that the existence of the control signal is always assured. The main characteristic of the proposed approach is that the a priori experts information required by the identification scheme is extremely low, limited to the knowledge of the signs of the centers of the fuzzy output partitions. Therefore, the proposed scheme is not vulnerable to initial design assumptions. Simulations on selected examples of well-known benchmarks illustrate the potency of the method.

