
A method for performing nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) measurements simultaneously from more than a single radiofrequency (RF) coil is presented. The method employs the detection of magnetic resonance signals in an array of detectors, where each detector is responsible for detecting a unique frequency bandwidth or a magnetic resonance signal from a unique location in a region in a primary, substantially homogeneous, static magnetic field. The detectors may be separated logically into groups, whereby all the detectors in a given group are essentially RF-decoupled from each other to substantially eliminate cross-talk by switching circuits or by being placed from each other sufficiently remotely. Sampling of detected signals from detectors in this array is done simultaneously over groups of noninteracting detectors. The detected signals from all detectors in a given group are simultaneously transmitted to a single preamplifier, thus increasing significantly the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in that preamplifier. Prior to transmitting each detected NMR signal of each detector to the preamplifier, each detected signal is separately and uniquely encoded electronically. This provides a method whereby the signal of each detector is uniquely encoded. Accumulating all these encoded signals, which were simultaneously received in a number of RF detectors into a single amplifier, results in the total signal having a high SNR ratio. This total amplified signal is later decoded into each detector's original signal by a decoding circuitry. Conventional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) techniques may be thereafter applied to obtain an image. Or else, conventional NMR techniques may be thereafter applied to obtain an improved SNR from a sample, using a single preamplifier with a multitude of detectors. Applying this method to a large number of miniature and closely packed RF detectors placed in an array-like configuration results in an MRI technique with a very fast acquisition time, an increased SNR and a high spatial resolution equivalent to the number of detectors per unit of length. Deblurring and decoupling algorithms allow for images from layers as deep as 6 mm to be acquired.

