
When conservative treatment of Peyronie's disease fails, the optimal surgical approach is not well defined. Multiple factors, including penile rigidity, degree of curvature, shaft narrowing with hinge effect and erectile response to vasoactive penile injections, indicate that no single approach is likely to solve the problem in all patients.

A surgical algorithm was developed for the treatment of Peyronie's Disease based on our previous surgical experience, which was used prospectively in 103 consecutive men. Penile straightening without prosthesis was offered to patients with adequate rigidity for coitus. Specifically, for mild to moderate curvature less than 60 degrees without hourglass or hinge effect deformity the less complicated tunica albuginea plication procedure was performed. For those men with more severe, complex curvature greater than 60 degrees and/or significant hourglass or hinge effect deformity plaque incision or partial excision with dermal grafting was offered to limit shaft shortening and to reconstruct a shaft with normal caliber to provide optimal axial support during intromission. For men with poor sexually induced erections and/or inadequate response to intracavernosal pharmacotherapy penile prosthesis placement was recommended to provide adequate straightening and rigidity.

Of 22 patients who underwent plication procedures 91% remained potent and the penis remained straight postoperatively. Of 52 patients who underwent an incision or partial excision and grafting procedure, 48 had dermal grafts with the penis remaining straight in 94% and 75% remaining potent postoperatively. A total of 29 patients received a prosthesis with the penis remaining straight in 93% who were sexually active postoperatively. During the follow up period (mean 22.3 months) there have been no mechanical device failures.

Surgical outcome was optimized with this algorithm, which correlates surgical complexity to the underlying severity of the penile deformity and erectile capacity.

