
Acute graft-versus-host disease is a severe complication of allogeneic stem cell transplantation in which the functional immune cells of the donor recognize the recipient as foreign and mount an immunological attack. There is an urgent need for better diagnostic instruments for the assessment of acute graft-versus-host disease. In the present study, a novel bioinformatics framework was used to identify gene expression patterns associated with acute graft-versushost disease in patients undergoing allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.

Peripheral blood cells were collected prospectively from patients who did develop acute graftversus-host disease (YES) and from those who did not (NO). Gene expression profiling was performed using a panel of 47 candidate genes potentially involved in alloreactive responses. The entire population of YES/NO acute graft-versus-host disease patients formed the experimental validation set. Personalized modeling based on a gene selection technique was applied to identify the most significant mRNA transcripts, which were then used to profile individual data samples for training and testing the classification/prediction framework.

A leave-one-out cross-validation procedure was performed to investigate the robustness of the classification framework producing the following results: 100% on the training dataset and 97% on the testing dataset. According to our integrated methodology, transcripts for FOXP3, ICOS, CD52 and CASP1, genes involved in immune alloreactive responses and participating in immune cell interactions, were identified as the most informative biomarkers in allogeneic stem cell transplant recipients experiencing acute graft-versus-host disease.

This study demonstrates that the integrated methodology proposed is useful for the selection of valid gene targets for the diagnosis of acute graft-versus-host disease, producing satisfactory accuracy over independent clinical features of the allogeneic transplanted population.

