
A new approach to measuring bone properties at the calcaneus using ultrasound parametric imaging has recently emerged. However, an additional source of observer-related error is the substantial regional variations in the pattern of ultrasound parameters. The contribution of intra-observer and inter-observer variability to the coefficient of variation can be eliminated using an algorithm which selects the region of interest (ROI) completely automatically. The objective of the present study was the clinical assessment of an automatic ROI for both broadband ultrasonic attenuation (BUA) and speed of sound (SOS) measurement using ultrasound parametric imaging. The automatic ROI was defined as the circular region of lowest attenuation in the posterior tuberosity of the calcaneus. We have tested this algorithm using clinical images of the calcaneus from 265 women. Mean coefficients of variation were 1.6% (95% confidence interval 1.4%-1.9%) and 0.26% (95% confidence interval 0.23%-0.32%) for BUA and SOS respectively (standardized CV was 2.1% for BUA and 2.6% for SOS). Z-scores in an osteoporotic group were -0.61 and -0.52 for BUA and SOS respectively. In healthy women, the age-related decline was -0.50 dB/ MHz per year (0.7%/year) for BUA and -1.2 m/s per year (0.08%/year) for SOS. In the subgroup of healthy postmenopausal women, using stepwise multiple regression, we found that BUA was predicted best by years since menopause (YSM) and weight, with overall model r2 = 0.28; SOS was predicted best by YSM only (r2 = 0.21). Neither the range of biological variation of ultrasound parameters nor the clinical value were affected by the choice of the region of lowest attenuation for measurement. The automatic procedure was totally independent of operator interaction, therefore excluding loss of precision due to intra- or inter-observer variability. The results showed the high precision and robustness of the procedure. These factors make this approach viable for routine clinical use.

