
To investigate the role of the 17 residues long presequence (p17) in the transport of the precursor of yeast API (pAPI) from the cytosol to the vacuole we have studied the effects of point mutations upon its conformation and on the process of transport. 1H NMR analysis of p17 indicates that in aqueous solution 26% of the molecules have the 4-12 segment folded into an helix. The hydrophobic environment provided by SDS micelles promotes the folding of 54% of the p17 molecules into a 5-16 amphipathic alpha-helix. Both Schiffer-Edmunson helical wheel analysis of segment 4-12 and residue hydrophobic moments calculated considering all possible side-chain orientations between 80 and 120 degrees, indicate the amphipathic character of the helixes assembled in water and detergent. Charge interactions between the dipole pairs N-Glu2Glu3 and C-Lys12Lys13 are essential for helix stability and condition pAPI transport. Substitution of either Pro2Pro3 or Lys2Lys3 for Glu2Glu3, results in moderate destabilization of the helix, decreases protein targeting to the vacuolar membrane and partly inhibits translocation of the protein to the vacuolar lumen. Replacement of either Pro12Pro13 or Glu12Glu13 for Lys12Lys13, causes a major disruption of the helix, decreases protein targeting and blocks completely the translocation of the protein to the vacuolar lumen. Replacement of Gly7 for Ile7, a substitution which is known to destabilize alpha-helixes in peptides and proteins as a result of the peptide bond to the solvent at Gly residues, produces similar effects as the substitutions for the K12K13 pair. The effects of Gly7 on helix stability and protein transport are partly reversed by introduction of Asp residues at positions 2 and 3 and Ala at position 4. Replacements such as Arg2 for Glu2, or Arg6 for Glu6, which change the net and local charges of the presequence without altering its conformation, have no effect on the protein transport. These results provide direct evidence of the involvement of the presequence in the transport of pAPI from the cytosol to the vacuole. They show that folding of the pAPI presequence is conditioned by the physical/chemical properties of the environment and is critical for targeting the protein to the vacuolar membrane and for its translocation to the vacuolar lumen.

