
The effects of site exchange due to slow conformational changes in rapidly rotating molecules in solution are examined in detail. Significant gaps in the currently available theory are filled. The effects of site exchange on the lineshape, decay of a simple spin-echo, decay of the even echoes in a Carr-Purcell-Meiboom-Gill (CPMG) pulse-sequence, and decay of the transverse magnetization in a resonant spin-locking field are investigated. Both trajectory and stochastic operator approaches are formulated and shown to be completely equivalent whenever the dynamics of population transfers among the inequivalent sites is governed by either a stationary or a nonstationary Markov process. A nonstationary Markov process may result from Brownian dynamics (a stationary Markov process) in a larger conformational space that contains the subspace of inequivalent sites. A continuous Gaussian exchange model is formulated in which a nucleus undergoes continuous one-dimensional motion in a harmonic potential well that is located in a linear chemical shift gradient. The effects of this Gaussian exchange model on the lineshape, simple spin-echo decay, and decay of the even echoes of a CPMG pulse train are treated rigorously via the trajectory approach. Compact analytical expressions are obtained for the relevant correlation functions in each case. The relevant decays are found to be exponential in the very short time and long time limits, which are not necessarily experimentally significant in any given case. In the fast exchange limit the relevant decays are exponential at all times, and explicit formulas are given for their decay rates. In the long time limit, all discrete multisite models with the same intrinsic Ro2 at every site are shown to be completely equivalent to a continuous Gaussian model with appropriate relaxation time and variance of the Larmor frequency. The effects of this Gaussian exchange model on the decay of the transverse magnetization in a resonant spin-locking field are treated heuristically by a trajectory approach. The intrinsic contribution (Ro1rho) of rapid rotations and dipole-dipole interactions to relax the transverse magnetizations of two nuclei of the same kind in the presence of a (nearly) resonant spin-locking field is also derived and found to be practically the same as the intrinsic contribution, Ro2, of those same rotations to the simple and CPMG spin-echo decay rates and linewidth. Literature data for the linewidth, decay rate of the CPMG even spin-echoes, and R(1rho) decay rate for the A9-H2 protons of adenines at the central TpA step in the sequence, 5'-GCAGGTTTAAACCTCG-3', are analyzed using the Gaussian exchange model to assess the time-scale and variance of the site exchange process as well as the intrinsic Ro2 rate. Although a single Gaussian exchange process with appropriate parameters can fit these three A9-H2 data rather well, this particular "solution" cannot be reconciled with NMR relaxation data on other protons in the same DNA molecule. Rather good agreement with all of the observations is obtained by using a model of two concurrent Gaussian exchange processes, whose relaxation times, tau = 7 and 460 micros, differ in time-scale by a factor of 65. The insensitivity of R1rho in the presence of a fast site exchange process to much slower concurrent site exchange processes is explicitly demonstrated. Protocols for detecting and characterizing a second slow site exchange process are suggested.

