
A variety of assays for the diagnosis human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8) infection have been reported. We compared several such assays with a panel of 88 specimens from human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected patients with Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) (current-KS patients; n = 30), HIV-infected patients who later developed KS (later-KS patients; n = 13), HIV-infected patients without KS (no-KS patients; n = 25), and healthy blood donors (n = 20). PCR assays were also performed with purified peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) to confirm positive serologic test results. The order of sensitivity of the serologic assays (most to least) in detecting HHV-8 infection in current-KS patients was the mouse monoclonal antibody-enhanced immunofluorescence assay (MIFA) for lytic antigen (97%), the orfK8.1 peptide enzyme immunoassay (EIA) (87%), the orf65 peptide EIA (87%), MIFA for latent antigen (83%), the Advanced Biotechnologies, Inc., EIA (80%), and the orf65 immunoblot assay (80%). Combination of the results of the two peptide EIAs (combined peptide EIAs) increased the sensitivity to 93%. For detection of infection in later-KS patients, the MIFA for lytic antigen (100%), the orfK8.1 peptide EIA (85%), and combined peptide EIAs (92%) were the most sensitive. Smaller percentages of no-KS patients were found to be positive (16 to 56%). Most positive specimens from the current-KS and later-KS groups were positive by multiple assays, while positive specimens from the no-KS group tended to be positive only by a single assay. PCR with PBMCs for portions of the HHV-8 orf65 and gB genes were positive for less than half of current-KS and later-KS patients and even fewer of the no-KS patients. The concordance between serologic assays was high. We propose screening by the combined peptide EIAs. For specimens that test weakly positive, we recommend that MIFA for lytic antigen be done. A positive result with a titer of >/=1:40 would be called HHV-8 positive. A negative or low titer would be called HHV-8 negative. If a population has a high percentage of persons who test positive by the combined peptide EIAs, then a MIFA could be performed with the negative specimens to determine if any positive specimens are being missed. Alternatively, if a population has a low percentage that test positive, then a MIFA could be performed with a subset of the negative specimens for the same reason. As described above, only a titer of >/=1:40 would be considered HHV-8 positive.

