
Breast cancer is becoming a leading cause of death among women in the whole world, meanwhile, it is confirmed that the early detection and accurate diagnosis of this disease can ensure a long survival of the patients. In this paper, a swarm intelligence technique based support vector machine classifier (PSO_SVM) is proposed for breast cancer diagnosis. In the proposed PSO-SVM, the issue of model selection and feature selection in SVM is simultaneously solved under particle swarm (PSO optimization) framework. A weighted function is adopted to design the objective function of PSO, which takes into account the average accuracy rates of SVM (ACC), the number of support vectors (SVs) and the selected features simultaneously. Furthermore, time varying acceleration coefficients (TVAC) and inertia weight (TVIW) are employed to efficiently control the local and global search in PSO algorithm. The effectiveness of PSO-SVM has been rigorously evaluated against the Wisconsin Breast Cancer Dataset (WBCD), which is commonly used among researchers who use machine learning methods for breast cancer diagnosis. The proposed system is compared with the grid search method with feature selection by F-score. The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed approach not only obtains much more appropriate model parameters and discriminative feature subset, but also needs smaller set of SVs for training, giving high predictive accuracy. In addition, Compared to the existing methods in previous studies, the proposed system can also be regarded as a promising success with the excellent classification accuracy of 99.3% via 10-fold cross validation (CV) analysis. Moreover, a combination of five informative features is identified, which might provide important insights to the nature of the breast cancer disease and give an important clue for the physicians to take a closer attention. We believe the promising result can ensure that the physicians make very accurate diagnostic decision in clinical breast cancer diagnosis.

