
A new predictive toxicokinetics model was developed to estimate subacute toxicity (target organs, severity, etc.) of non-congeneric industrial chemicals, where the chemical structures and physico-chemical properties are only available. Thus, a physiological pharmacokinetics model, which consists of blood, liver, kidney (these were experimentally found as major toxicological targets), muscle and fat compartments, was established to simulate the chemical concentrations in organs/tissues with pharmacokinetic parameters by means of Runge-Kutta-Gill algorithm. The pharmacokinetic parameters, i.e. absorption rate, absorption ratio, hepatic extraction ratio of metabolism and renal clearance were calculated by using separately established Quantitative Structure-Pharmacokinetics Relationship equations. The developed predictive model was then applied to simulations of 43 non-congeneric industrial chemicals. The chemical concentrations in organs/tissues after single oral administration were simulated, and their maximum concentrations (Cmax's) and area under the concentration-time curves (AUC's) were calculated. Fast Inverse Laplace Transform was newly applied for the purpose of simulation of 28-day repeated dose toxicity. Simulated concentrations of 28 days repeated dose were, however, found to be the same as those of simple repetitions of a single administration per day because of the short half-lives of non-congeneric industrial chemicals. A comparison of subacute toxicity data with Cmax's and AUC's in a single dose scenario suggested that the organs/tissues with relatively high concentrations of tested chemical substances were the most sensitive targets within a chemical. Chemical concentrations in liver, for instance, were correlated with the severity of hepatotoxicity among the chemicals. It was also suggested that to improve and widen the present approach, data of metabolite and reactivity of non-congeneric industrial chemicals to organs/tissues, receptors, etc. should be incorporated into the model.

