
The overall crystallization rates and mean relaxation times of amorphous nifedipine and phenobarbital in the presence of poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP) were determined at various temperatures to gain further insight into the effect of molecular mobility on the crystallization rates of amorphous drugs and the possibility of predicting stability from their molecular mobility. Nifedipine-PVP (9:1 w/w) and phenobarbital-PVP (95:5 w/w) solid dispersions were prepared by melting and rapidly cooling mixtures of each drug and PVP. The amount of amorphous nifedipine remaining in the solid dispersion was calculated from the heat of crystallization,which was obtained by differential scanning calorimetry. The amount of amorphous phenobarbital remaining in the solid dispersion was estimated from the change in the heat capacity at its glass transition temperature (T(g)). The time required for the amount of amorphous drug remaining to fall to 90% (t(90)) was calculated from the profile of time versus the amount of amorphous drug remaining. The t(90) values for the solid dispersions studied were 100-1000 times longer than those of pure amorphous drugs when compared at the same temperature. Enthalpy relaxation of the amorphous drugs in the solid dispersions was reduced compared with that in the pure amorphous drugs, indicating that the molecular mobility of the amorphous drugs is reduced in the presence of PVP. The temperature dependence of mean relaxation time (tau) for the nifedipine-PVP solid dispersion was calculated using the Adam-Gibbs-Vogel equation. Parameters D and T(0) in this equation were estimated from the heating rate dependence of T(g). Similar temperature dependence was observed for t(90) and tau values of the solid dispersion, indicating that the information on the temperature dependence of the molecular mobility, along with the crystallization data obtained at around the T(g), are useful for estimating the t(90) of overall crystallization at temperatures below T(g) in the presence of excipients.

