
In most approaches to the problem of two-dimensional homomorphic deconvolution of ultrasound images, the estimation of a corresponding point-spread function (PSF) is necessarily the first stage in the process of image restoration. This estimation is usually performed in the Fourier domain by either successive or simultaneous estimation of the amplitude and phase of the Fourier transform (FT) of the PSE This paper addresses the problem of recovering the FT-phase of the PSF, which is an important reconstruction problem by itself. The purpose of this paper is twofold. First, it provides a theoretical framework, establishing that the FT-phase of the PSF can be effectively estimated by a proper smoothing of the FT-phase of the appropriate radio-frequency (RF) image. Second, it presents a novel approach to the estimation of the FT-phase of the PSF, by solving a continuous Poisson equation over a predefined smooth subspace, in contrast to the discrete Poisson equation solver used for the classical least mean squares phase unwrapping algorithms, followed by a smoothing procedure. The proposed approach is possible due to the distinct properties of the FT-phases, among which the most important property is the availability of precise values of their partial derivatives. This property overcomes the main disadvantage of the discrete schemes, which routinely use wrapped (principal) values of the phase in order to approximate its partial derivatives. Since such an approximation is feasible subject to the restriction that the partial phase differences do not exceed pi in absolute value, the discrete schemes perform satisfactory only for few practical situations. The proposed approach is shown to be independent of this restriction and, thus, it performs for a wider class of the phases with significantly lower errors. The main advantages of the novel method over the algorithms based on discrete schemes are demonstrated in a series of computer simulations and for in vivo measurements.

