
In the United States, fresh-frozen plasma (FFP) is commonly used for urgent reversal of warfarin; however, dosage recommendations are difficult to find. If validated, a proposed method that uses a nonlinear relationship between international normalized ratio (INR) and clotting factor activity (CFa) would be useful. This study retrospectively evaluated a proposed equation with adult medical inpatients who received FFP for warfarin reversal. For each patient the equation was used to predict the dose of FFP required to achieve the observed change in INR, which was then compared to the actual dose. The equation was considered successful if the predicted dose was within +/-20% of the actual dose. Subgroup analyses included subjects who received concomitant vitamin K; subjects with supratherapeutic INRs (>3); and subjects with significantly elevated INRs (>5). Of the 209 patients screened, 91 met criteria for inclusion in the study. Use of the equation to calculate the predicted dose of FFP was successful in 11 patients (12.1%) with use of actual body weight for prediction and in 23 patients (25.3%) with use of ideal body weight (P = 0.02). The equation performed similarly in all subgroups analyzed. The mean predicted FFP dose was significantly greater than the actual dose in all patients when actual body weight was used (925.2 mL vs. 620.6 mL; P < 0.001). Least-squares regression modeling of repeat INR (converted to CFa) produced a model that accounted for 57% of the variance in repeat INR. The value predicted from the model was closer to the actual CFa than was the value predicted from the published equation in every comparison, but it was statistically different only when actual body weight was used. This study revealed that a published equation for calculation of FFP dose to reverse oral anticoagulation resulted in doses that were significantly higher than the actual dose. Use of ideal body weight improved accuracy but was still not successful for the majority of patients. Until trials are able to prospectively demonstrate the accuracy of a dose-prediction model for FFP, dosing will remain largely empiric.

