
To perform a biologic characterization of the urothelial neoplasms of patients in the intermediate-risk group using multicolor-fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). A general consensus has not been reached with regard to the optimal therapy and follow-up of patients with urothelial neoplasms at intermediate risk of progression. On the basis of the chromosomal pattern, we developed a new follow-up algorithm for this group and report our preliminary results.

Voided urine samples of 51 consecutive patients (mean age 72.2 years, range 52 to 93) under follow-up after complete transurethral resection of intermediate-risk urothelial carcinoma were evaluated by liquid-based cytology (ThinPrep) and uCyt+. From the residual material, Multicolor-FISH (Urovysion) was performed. Any cystoscopically suspicious lesion was biopsied or removed transurethrally. The mean follow-up time was 14.2 months (range 6 to 30, SD 5.5).

Two of the 51 patients were not evaluated because of the presence of intense granulocytosis and insufficient urothelial cells. Of the 49 remaining patients, the results of the Multicolor-FISH analysis were negative (diploid chromosomal pattern) in 14; 20 patients showed the loss of one or both alleles of p16 and/or an aneuploidy of chromosome 3, and 15 patients had aneuploidy of chromosome 7 and/or 17. Of the 14 FISH-negative patients, 2 (14.3%) had histologically verified recurrence, and 3 (15.0%) of the 20 p16/3-positive patients had recurrence and 9 (60.0%) of the 15 7/17-positive patients had either recurrence or progression.

Using the Urovysion test, it is possible to predict the biologic behavior of urothelial cancer with a significant impact on the follow-up of patients. The intermediate-risk group of urothelial cancer can be eliminated in the routine workup by classifying these patients according to their chromosomal pattern and defining those patients who can follow the low-risk scheme and those who must be monitored according to the guidelines for high-risk superficial lesions.

