
Topographic treatment is a radiation therapy delivery technique for fixed-gantry (nonrotational) treatments on a helical tomotherapy system. The intensity-modulated fields are created by moving the treatment couch relative to a fan-beam positioned at fixed gantry angles. The delivered dose distribution is controlled by moving multileaf collimator (MLC) leaves into and out of the fan beam. The purpose of this work was to develop a leaf-sequencing algorithm for creating topographic MLC sequences. Topographic delivery was modeled using the analogy of a water faucet moving over a collection of bottles. The flow rate per unit length of the water from the faucet represented the photon fluence per unit length along the width of the fan beam, the collection of bottles represented the pixels in the treatment planning fluence map, and the volume of water collected in each bottle represented the delivered fluence. The radiation fluence per unit length delivered to the target at a given position is given by the convolution of the intensity distribution per unit length over the width of the beam and the time per unit distance along the direction of travel that an MLC leaf is open. The MLC opening times for the desired dose profiles were determined using a technique based on deconvolution using a genetic algorithm. The MLC opening times were expanded in terms of a Fourier series, and a genetic algorithm was used to find the best expansion coefficients for a given dose distribution. A series of wedge shapes (15, 30, 45, and 60 deg) and "dose well" test fluence maps were created to test the algorithm's ability to generate topographic leaf sequences. The accuracy of the leaf-sequencing algorithm was measured on a helical tomotherapy system using radiographic film placed at depth in water equivalent material. The measured dose profiles were compared with the desired dose distributions. The agreement was within +/- 2% or 2 mm distance-to-agreement (DTA) in the high dose gradient regions for all test cases. The central axis measured dose was between 3.6% and 4.2% higher than the expected dose for the wedge cases. For the "dose well" test cases, the calculated and measured doses agreed to within +/- 0.5% at the peak and within +/- 1.6% in the "dose well." The topographic leaf-sequencing algorithm produced deliverable dose distributions that agreed well with the calculated dose distributions. This delivery technique could be used for treatment of whole intact breast. However, additional work is needed to further improve the algorithm in order to get better agreement between the calculated, deliverable, and measured dose distributions.

