
Subharmonic intravascular ultrasound imaging (S-IVUS) could visualize the adventitial vasa vasorum, but the high pressure threshold required to incite subharmonic behavior in an ultrasound contrast agent will compromise sensitivity-a trait that has hampered the clinical use of S-IVUS. The purpose of this study was to assess the feasibility of using coded-chirp excitations to improve the sensitivity and axial resolution of S-IVUS.

The subharmonic response of Targestar-p(TM), a commercial microbubble ultrasound contrast agent (UCA), to coded-chirp (5%-20% fractional bandwidth) pulses and narrowband sine-burst (4% fractional bandwidth) pulses was assessed, first using computer simulations and then experimentally. Rectangular windowed excitation pulses with pulse durations ranging from 0.25 to 3 μs were used in all studies. All experimental studies were performed with a pair of transducers (20 MHz/10 MHz), both with diameter of 6.35 mm and focal length of 50 mm. The size distribution of the UCA was measured with a Casy(TM) Cell counter.

The simulation predicted a pressure threshold that was an order of magnitude higher than that determined experimentally. However, all other predictions were consistent with the experimental observations. It was predicted that: (1) exciting the agent with chirps would produce stronger subharmonic response relative to those produced by sine-bursts; (2) increasing the fractional bandwidth of coded-chirp excitation would increase the sensitivity of subharmonic imaging; and (3) coded-chirp would increase axial resolution. The experimental results revealed that subharmonic-to-fundamental ratios obtained with chirps were 5.7 dB higher than those produced with sine-bursts of similar duration. The axial resolution achieved with 20% fractional bandwidth chirps was approximately twice that achieved with 4% fractional bandwidth sine-bursts.

The coded-chirp method is a suitable excitation strategy for subharmonic IVUS imaging. At the 20 MHz transmission frequency and 20% fractional bandwidth, coded-chirp excitation appears to represent the ideal tradeoff between subharmonic strength and axial resolution.

