
Demonstrate the technology for the design, fabrication, and verification of an electron bolus used in the preoperative irradiation of a mesenchymal chondrosarcoma in the paraspinal muscle region (T8-T12), in which the target volume overlay a portion of the spinal cord, both lungs, and the right kidney.

An electron-bolus design algorithm implemented on a three dimensional (3D) radiotherapy treatment planning system designed the bolus to yield a dose distribution that met physician-specified clinical criteria. Electron doses were calculated using a 3D electron pencil-beam dose algorithm. A computer-driven milling machine fabricated the bolus from modeling wax, machining both the patient surface and the beam surface of the bolus. Verification of the bolus fabrication was achieved by repeating the patient's computed tomography (CT) scan with the fabricated bolus in place (directly on the posterior surface of the prone patient) and then recalculating the patient's dose distribution using the 3D radiotherapy treatment planning system.

A treatment plan using a 17-MeV posterior electron field with a bolus delivered a superior dose distribution to the patient than did the same plan without a bolus. The bolus plan delivered a slightly increased dose to the target volume as a result of a slightly broader range of doses. There were significant reductions in dose to critical structures (cord, lungs, and kidney) in the bolus plan, as evidenced by dose-volume histograms (DVHs). The patient dose distribution, calculated using CT scan data with the fabricated bolus, showed no significant differences from the planned dose distribution.

A bolus can provide considerable sparing of normal tissues when using a posterior electron beam to irradiate the paraspinal muscles. Bolus design and fabrication using the tools described in this paper are adequate for patient treatment. CT imaging of the patient with the bolus in place followed by calculation of the patient's dose distribution demonstrated a useful method for verification of the bolus design and fabrication process.

