
Enhanced clinical pharmacology and therapeutics education of medical students is important for improving effective and safe drug therapy. Increased education about pharmacovigilance is needed because serious drug-induced adverse effects are increasing. Fostering the needed scientific approach to prescribing requires knowledge of evidence-based drug therapy, based on understanding clinical trials. Therapeutic agents with novel mechanisms of action are increasingly available, and an unbiased understanding of the risks and benefits of novel agents is also important. These issues can be addressed in clinical pharmacology courses. However, many medical schools lack sufficient clinical pharmacologists to teach such courses. The Southern Illinois University Medical School faculty implemented an Advanced Therapeutics course to address these issues.

Development of this course involved defining appropriate content and organizing preclinical pharmacology and clinical faculty into teaching teams. The course was offered to 4th-year medical students and covered clinical trial information, and cutting-edge therapeutic developments. The "ABCs of Pharmacology" is a mental algorithm that was presented in the sophomore year and reintroduced in this course. This algorithm emphasizes pharmacovigilance, which stresses the balance between positive and negative effects of pharmacological agents. General principles of clinical pharmacology and therapeutics were covered by a clinical pharmacologist. Most sessions on specific disease treatment involved an integrated presentation by a preclinical pharmacologist and a clinician with expertise in that topic, often in the context of clinical cases. Other important topics were emphasized, which reinforce individualization of therapy, including pharmacogenomics that may determine idiosyncratic responses. Feedback during and following the course was obtained via questionnaires.

This approach was well received by participating students and graduates. Most students rated this course as a valuable experience.

This approach appears useful for educating medical students about therapeutics at medical schools that lack sufficient clinical pharmacology faculty to mount such a course.

