
In recent years, there has been increasing use of CTP imaging in patients with aneurysmal SAH to evaluate for vasospasm. Given the critical role of the arterial input function for generation of accurate CTP data, several studies have evaluated the effect of varying the arterial input function location in patients with acute stroke. Our aim was to determine the effect on quantitative CTP data when the arterial input function location is distal to significant vasospasm in patients with aneurysmal SAH.

A retrospective study was conducted of patients with aneurysmal SAH admitted from 2005 to 2011. Inclusion criteria were the presence of at least 1 anterior cerebral artery or MCA vessel with a radiologically significant vasospasm and at least 1 of these vessels without vasospasm. We postprocessed each CTP dataset 4 separate times by using standardized methods, only varying the selection of the arterial input function location in the anterior cerebral artery and MCA vessels. For each of the 4 separately processed examinations for each patient, quantitative data for CBF, CBV, and MTT were calculated by region-of-interest sampling of the vascular territories. Statistical analysis was performed by using a linear mixed-effects model.

One hundred twelve uniquely processed CTP levels were analyzed in 28 patients (mean age, 52 years; 24 women and 4 men) recruited from January 2005 to December 2011. The average Hunt and Hess scale score was 2.89 ± 0.79. The average time to CTP from initial presentation was 8.2 ± 5.1 days. For each vascular territory (right and left anterior cerebral artery, MCA, posterior cerebral artery), there were no significant differences in the quantitative CBF, CBV, and MTT generated by arterial input function locations distal to significant vasospasm compared with nonvasospasm vessels (P > .05).

Arterial input function placement distal to significant vasospasm does not affect the quantitative CTP data in the corresponding vascular territory or any other vascular territory in aneurysmal SAH.

