
We consider the synchronization problem of an arbitrary number of coupled nonlinear oscillators with delays in the interconnections. The network topology is described by a directed graph. Unlike the conventional approach of deriving directly sufficient synchronization conditions, the approach of the paper starts from an exact stability analysis in a (gain, delay) parameter space of a synchronized equilibrium and extracts insights from an analysis of its bifurcations and from the corresponding emerging behavior. Instrumental to this analysis a factorization of the characteristic equation is employed that not only facilitates the analysis and reduces computational cost but also allows to determine the precise role of the individual agents and the topology of the network in the (in)stability mechanisms. The study provides an algorithm to perform a stability and bifurcation analysis of synchronized equilibria. Furthermore, it reveals fundamental limitations to synchronization and it explains under which conditions on the topology of the network and on the characteristics of the coupling the systems are expected to synchronize. In the second part of the paper the results are applied to coupled Lorenz systems. The main results show that for sufficiently large coupling gains, delay-coupled Lorenz systems exhibit a generic behavior that does not depend on the number of systems and the topology of the network, as long as some basic assumptions are satisfied, including the strong connectivity of the graph. Here the linearized stability analysis is strengthened by a nonlinear stability analysis which confirms the predictions based on the linearized stability and bifurcation analysis. This illustrates the usefulness of the exact linearized analysis in a situation where a direct nonlinear stability analysis is not possible or where it yields conservative conditions from which it is hard to get qualitative insights in the synchronization mechanisms and their scaling properties. In the examples several network topologies are considered.

