
The solution structure of Cobeta-5'-deoxyadenosylimidazolylcobamide, Ado(Im)Cbl, the coenzyme B(12) analogue in which the axial 5,6-dimethylbenzimidazole (Bzm) ligand is replaced by imidazole, has been determined by NMR-restrained molecular modeling. A two-state model, in which a conformation with the adenosyl moiety over the southern quadrant of the corrin and a conformation with the adenosyl ligand over the eastern quadrant of the corrin are both populated at room temperature, was required by the nOe data. A rotation profile and molecular dynamics simulations suggest that the eastern conformation is the more stable, in contrast to AdoCbl itself in which the southern conformation is preferred. Consensus structures of the two conformers show that the axial Co-N bond is slightly shorter and the corrin ring is less folded in Ado(Im)Cbl than in AdoCbl. A study of the thermolysis of Ado(Im)Cbl in aqueous solution (50-125 degrees C) revealed competing homolytic and heterolytic pathways as for AdoCbl but with heterolysis being 9-fold faster and homolysis being 3-fold slower at 100 degrees C than for AdoCbl. Determination of the pK(a)'s for the Ado(Im)Cbl base-on/base-off reaction and for the detached imidazole ribonucleoside as a function of temperature permitted correction of the homolysis and heterolysis rate constants for the temperature-dependent presence of the base-off species of Ado(Im)Cbl. Activation analysis of the resulting rate constants for the base-on species show that the entropy of activation for Ado(Im)Cbl homolysis (13.7 +/- 0.9 cal mol(-1) K(-1)) is identical with that of AdoCbl (13.5 +/- 0.7 cal mol(-1) K(-1)) but that the enthalpy of activation (34.8 kcal mol(-1)) is 1.0 +/- 0.4 kcal mol(-1) larger. The opposite effect is seen for heterolysis, where the enthalpies of activation are identical but the entropy of activation is 5 +/- 1 cal mol(-1) K(-1) less negative for Ado(Im)Cbl. Extrapolation to 37 degrees C provides a rate constant for Ado(Im)Cbl homolysis of 2.1 x 10(-9) s(-1), 4.3-fold smaller than for AdoCbl. Combined with earlier results for the enzyme-induced homolysis of Ado(Im)Cbl by the ribonucleoside triphosphate reductase from Lactobacillus leichmannii, the catalytic efficiency of the enzyme for homolysis of Ado(Im)Cbl at 37 degrees C can be calculated to be 4.0 x 10(8), 3.8-fold, or 0.8 kcal mol(-1), smaller than for AdoCbl. Thus, the bulky Bzm ligand makes at best a <1 kcal mol(-1) contribution to the enzymatic activation of coenzyme B(12).

