
Particle growth by the heterogeneous reaction of aldehydes was evaluated in 0.5 m3 Teflon film bags under darkness in the presence of background seed aerosols. The aldehydes used were as follows: glyoxal, butanal, hexanal, octanal, and decanal. To study acid catalyst effects on aldehyde heterogeneous reactions, one of the Teflon bags was initially filled with seed aerosols composed of ammonium sulfate-aerosol acidified with sulfuric acid. These results were compared to particle growth reactions that contained only ammonium sulfate as a background seed aerosol. The gas-phase aldehydes were then added to the Teflon bags. In selected experiments, 1-decanol was also added to the Teflon bags with aldehydes to clarify particle growth via a heterogeneous hemiacetal/acetal formation in the presence/absence of an acid catalyst. The particle size distribution and growth were measured using a scanning mobility particle sizer (TSI-SMPS), and the results were applied to predicting aerosol growth and size distribution changes by condensation and heterogeneous reactions. Aerosols created from the heterogeneous reactions of aldehydes were collected directly on an ungreased zinc selenide (ZnSe) FTIR disk (25 mm in diameter) by impaction. The ZnSe disks were directly analyzed for product functional groups inthe aerosol phase using a Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrometer with a deuterated triglycine sulfate (DTGS) detector. Aerosol growth by heterogeneous aldehyde reactions proceeds via a hydration, polymerization process, and hemiacetal/acetal formation from the reaction of aldehydes with alcohols. These aldehyde heterogeneous reactions were accelerated in the presence of an acid catalyst, H2SO4, and led to higher aerosol yields than when H2SO4 was not present in the seed aerosol. The FTIR spectra obtained from the growing aerosol, also illustrated aldehyde group transformation in the particle phase as a function of the heterogeneous reaction. It was concluded that aldehydes, which can be produced by atmospheric photochemical reactions, can significantly contribute on secondary aerosol formation through heterogeneous reactions in the presence of an acid catalyst.

