
First Dr. Abad gave thanks to his teachers, to Excelentísimo Mr. President and to the Illustrious Academics of the Royal National Academy of Medicine, to other people and to the auditory. This investigation belongs to Objective Medicine being applicable to Medicine, Pharmacy and Veterinary, that is to say, to the Sciences of the Health. After examining the clinical history he made an analysis of the selected research premises. Among others he analysed what are denominated bigger and smaller symptoms, what means the penetration and the symptomatic invasion, what is a hidden illness, the metastatic condition, what is typical and atypical of a clinical diagram, the problem of previous illnesses with repercussion on the current one (comorbility), the influence of the syntomatology, the immunity and the psyche about the quality of life; lastly the histopatologic factors. These concepts belong to the nosology and the propedeutics (semiotecnics and semiology). The material of the investigation consists on a database, for the time being of more that 6.600 terms, corresponding to the pathology, which is enlargeable and amendable. Each term has been classified by seven concepts. It has been proceeded to an unification of the language, avoiding the polisemia, by means of another database of more than 5.000 key-words that later on have transformed in determinants. The Method, starting from the determinants, built a Biological Scientific Model of 30 groups, applicable to the Medicine which produces a Virtual Real Image of the sintomatology. The results obtained are those that next are described. Grouping the data of the 30 groups he finally obtained a Virtual Real Image of the illness, of eight bases, denominated Nosoma which indicates the variations, from the psychic to the organic field, during the evolution and pursuit of the illness. You can make a quality of life analysis on the different stages of the illness that, together with the value of the symptoms, by means of an algorithm, produces an Nosométric Index, which indicates a valuation of improvement or sick person worsening. This index serves as a control of the therapeutic effectiveness on studies or clinical rehearsals. The system also obtains the valuation of sequels and inabilities upon an illness or accident, and either it's adequate to value patient's death caused by illness in course or for the comorbility, confronting it with the autopsy. By means of this Index, together with the data describing patient's evolution obtained by the computer's program, it's possible to establish doctor's defence parameters against juridical problems.

