
The definition of anemia is established by the World Health Organization and was subsequently adopted by the American Society of Transplantation, which defines anemia as hemoglobin concentration <12 g/dl in women and <13 g/dl in men. PREVALENCE OF ANEMIA POSTTRANSPLANTATION: Varies throughout the posttransplantation period and is associated with the degree of renal graft function. The relationship between hemoglobin levels and glomerular filtration does not behave the same way as in the population with chronic kidney disease. The results of various studies show a high prevalence in the first months after transplantation (<6 months), which decreases from the first year posttransplantation and then increases related to loss of graft function. European study on the management of anemia showed a prevalence of anemia in 38.6% and only 18% of patients with severe anemia were treated with erythropoietin (EPO).

There is a decrease in the synthesis of erythropoietin (EPO) or an increase in resistance to EPO. There are many factors that can cause anemia post-transplantation. Some of these factors are specific to transplanted patients whilst others are common to all patients with chronic kidney disease. Among the common factors there are: the degree of renal function and iron deficiency and among the factors of transplantation there are acute rejection, post-transplantation medications, infections and malignancies.

The available data evaluating the association of anemia with morbidity and mortality of the patient and graft survival are scarce. Most studies are retrospective and analyze experiences of individual centers. They showed a higher mortality and morbidity among patients with a hemoglobin <11 g/dl. (Evidence B). TREATMENT OF POST-TRANSPLANTATION ANEMIA: Erythropoiesis-stimulating agents (ESA) and replenishment of iron deposits (Evidence A). RESPONSE TO TREATMENT: In transplant patients there may be some resistance to treatment with erythropoiesis- stimulating agents (ESA) due to the use of myelosuppressive medications, chronic inflammation and other factors. - Adverse effects of treatment with ESA: There are few controlled studies failed to show respect to the ESA that are effective and unlikely to accelerate the deterioration of renal function but may aggravate hypertension.

